Information about Mental Illness and the Brain
Defining Mental Illness1
We can all be "sad" or "blue" at times in our lives. We have all seen movies about the madman and his crime spree, with the underlying cause of mental illness. We sometimes even make jokes about people being crazy or nuts, even though we know that we shouldn't. We have all had some exposure to mental illness, but do we really understand it or know what it is? Many of our preconceptions are incorrect. A mental illness can be defined as a health condition that changes a person's thinking, feelings, or behavior (or all three) and that causes the person distress and difficulty in functioning. As with many diseases, mental illness is severe in some cases and mild in others. Individuals who have a mental illness don't necessarily look like they are sick, especially if their illness is mild. Other individuals may show more explicit symptoms such as confusion, agitation, or withdrawal. There are many different mental illnesses, including depression, schizophrenia, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), autism, and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Each illness alters a person's thoughts, feelings, and/or behaviors in distinct ways. In this module, we will at times discuss mental illness in general terms and at other times, discuss specific mental illnesses. Depression, schizophrenia, and ADHD will be presented in greater detail than other mental illnesses.
Not all brain diseases are categorized as mental illnesses. Disorders such as epilepsy, Parkinson's disease, and multiple sclerosis are brain disorders, but they are considered neurological diseases rather than mental illnesses. Interestingly, the lines between mental illnesses and these other brain or neurological disorders is blurring somewhat. As scientists continue to investigate the brains of people who have mental illnesses, they are learning that mental illness is associated with changes in the brain's structure, chemistry, and function and that mental illness does indeed have a biological basis. This ongoing research is, in some ways, causing scientists to minimize the distinctions between mental illnesses and these other brain disorders. In this curriculum supplement, we will restrict our discussion of mental illness to those illnesses that are traditionally classified as mental illnesses, as listed in the previous paragraph.
Mental Illness in the Population2
Many people feel that mental illness is rare, something that only happens to people with life situations very different from their own, and that it will never affect them. Studies of the epidemiology of mental illness indicate that this belief is far from accurate. In fact, the surgeon general reports that mental illnesses are so common that few U.S. families are untouched by them.
Few U.S. families are untouched by mental illness.
Mental Illness in Adults
Scientists estimate that one of every four people is affected by mental illness either directly or indirectly.
Scientists estimate that one of every four people is affected by mental illness either directly or indirectly.
Even if you or a family member has not experienced mental illness directly, it is very likely that you have known someone who has. Estimates are that at least one in four people is affected by mental illness either directly or indirectly. Consider the following statistics to get an idea of just how widespread the effects of mental illness are in society: 4, 25, 44
    According to recent estimates, approximately 20 percent of Americans, or about one in five people over the age of 18, suffer from a diagnosable mental disorder in a given year.
    Four of the 10 leading causes of disability—major depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, and obsessive-compulsive disorder—are mental illnesses.
    About 3 percent of the population have more than one mental illness at a time.
    About 5 percent of adults are affected so seriously by mental illness that it interferes with their ability to function in society. These severe and persistent mental illnesses include schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, other severe forms of depression, panic disorder, and obsessive-compulsive disorder.
    Approximately 20 percent of doctor's appointments are related to anxiety disorders such as panic attacks.
    Eight million people have depression each year.
    Two million Americans have schizophrenia disorders, and 300,000 new cases are diagnosed each year.
Mental Illness in Children and Adolescents
Mental illness is not uncommon among children and adolescents. Approximately 12 million children under the age of 18 have mental disorders.4 The National Mental Health Association33 has compiled some statistics about mental illness in children and adolescents:
    Mental health problems affect one in every five young people at any given time.
    An estimated two-thirds of all young people with mental health problems are not receiving the help they need.
    Less than one-third of the children under age 18 who have a serious mental health problem receive any mental health services.
    As many as 1 in every 33 children may be depressed. Depression in adolescents may be as high as 1 in 8.
    Suicide is the third leading cause of death for 15- to 24-years-olds and the sixth leading cause of death for 5- to 15-year-olds.
    Schizophrenia is rare in children under age 12, but it occurs in about 3 of every 1,000 adolescents.
    Between 118,700 and 186,600 youths in the juvenile justice system have at least one mental illness.
    Of the 100,000 teenagers in juvenile detention, an estimated 60 percent have behavioral, cognitive, or emotional problems.
Warning Signs for Mental Illness3
Each mental illness has its own characteristic symptoms. (See Section 10 for information about some specific illnesses.) However, there are some general warning signs that might alert you that someone needs professional help.4 Some of these signs include
    marked personality change,
    inability to cope with problems and daily activities,
    strange or grandiose ideas,
    excessive anxieties,
    prolonged depression and apathy,
    marked changes in eating or sleeping patterns,
    thinking or talking about suicide or harming oneself,
    extreme mood swings—high or low,
    abuse of alcohol or drugs, and
    excessive anger, hostility, or violent behavior.
A person who shows any of these signs should seek help from a qualified health professional.
Diagnosing Mental Illness3
Mental Health Professionals
To be diagnosed with a mental illness, a person must be evaluated by a qualified professional who has expertise in mental health. Mental health professionals include psychiatrists, psychologists, psychiatric nurses, social workers, and mental health counselors. Family doctors, internists, and pediatricians are usually qualified to diagnose common mental disorders such as depression, anxiety disorders, and ADHD. In many cases, depending on the individual and his or her symptoms, a mental health professional who is not a psychiatrist will refer the patient to a psychiatrist. A psychiatrist is a medical doctor (M.D.) who has received additional training in the field of mental health and mental illnesses. Psychiatrists evaluate the person's mental condition in coordination with his or her physical condition and can prescribe medication. Only psychiatrists and other M.D.s can prescribe medications to treat mental illness.
Mental Illnesses are Diagnosed by Symptoms
Unlike some disease diagnoses, doctors can't do a blood test or culture some microorganisms to determine whether a person has a mental illness. Maybe scientists will develop discrete physiological tests for mental illnesses in the future; until then, however, mental health professionals will have to diagnose mental illnesses based on the symptoms that a person has. Basing a diagnosis on symptoms and not on a quantitative medical test, such as a blood chemistry test, a throat swab, X-rays, or urinalysis, is not unusual. Physicians diagnose many diseases, including migraines, Alzheimer's disease, and Parkinson's disease based on their symptoms alone. For other diseases, such as asthma or mononucleosis, doctors rely on analyzing symptoms to get a good idea of what the problem is and then use a physiological test to provide additional information or to confirm their diagnosis.
When a mental health professional works with a person who might have a mental illness, he or she will, along with the individual, determine what symptoms the individual has, how long the symptoms have persisted, and how his or her life is being affected. Mental health professionals often gather information through an interview during which they ask the patient about his or her symptoms, the length of time that the symptoms have occurred, and the severity of the symptoms. In many cases, the professional will also get information about the patient from family members to obtain a more comprehensive picture. A physician likely will conduct a physical exam and consult the patient's history to rule out other health problems.
Mental health professionals evaluate symptoms to make a diagnosis of mental illness. They rely on the criteria specified in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV; currently, the fourth edition), published by the American Psychiatric Association, to diagnose a specific mental illness.5 For each mental illness, the DSM-IV gives a general description of the disorder and a list of typical symptoms. Mental health professionals refer to the DSM-IV to confirm that the symptoms a patient exhibits match those of a specific mental illness. Although the DSM-IV provides valuable information that helps mental health professionals diagnose mental illness, these professionals realize that it is important to observe patients over a period of time to understand the individual's mental illness and its effects on his or her life. We present the DSM-IV criteria for the specific diseases discussed in this module in Section 10, Information about Specific Mental Illnesses.
    Mental health professionals evaluate symptoms to make a diagnosis of mental illness.
Mental Illness and the Brain4
The term mental illness clearly indicates that there is a problem with the mind. But is it just the mind in an abstract sense, or is there a physical basis to mental illness? As scientists continue to investigate mental illnesses and their causes, they learn more and more about how the biological processes that make the brain work are changed when a person has a mental illness.
The Basics of Brain Function
Before thinking about the problems that occur in the brain when someone has a mental illness, it is helpful to think about how the brain functions normally. The brain is an incredibly complex organ. It makes up only 2 percent of our body weight, but it consumes 20 percent of the oxygen we breathe and 20 percent of the energy we take in. It controls virtually everything we as humans experience, including movement, sensing our environment, regulating our involuntary body processes such as breathing, and controlling our emotions. Hundreds of thousands of chemical reactions occur every second in the brain; those reactions underlie the thoughts, actions, and behaviors with which we respond to environmental stimuli. In short, the brain dictates the internal processes and behaviors that allow us to survive.
The neuron, or nerve cell, is the functional unit of the nervous system.
The neuron, or nerve cell, is the functional unit of the nervous system. The neuron has processes called dendrites that receive signals and an axon that transmits signals to another neuron.

How does the brain take in all this information, process it, and cause a response? The basic functional unit of the brain is the neuron. A neuron is a specialized cell that can produce different actions because of its precise connections with other neurons, sensory receptors, and muscle cells. A typical neuron has four structurally and functionally defined regions: the cell body, dendrites, axons, and the axon terminals.

The cell body is the metabolic center of the neuron. The nucleus is located in the cell body and most of the cell's protein synthesis occurs here.

A neuron usually has multiple fibers called dendrites that extend from the cell body. These processes usually branch out somewhat like tree branches and serve as the main apparatus for receiving input from other nerve cells.

The cell body also gives rise to the axon. The axon is usually much longer than the dendrites; in some cases, an axon can be up to 1 meter long. The axon is the part of the neuron that is specialized to carry messages away from the cell body and to relay messages to other cells. Some large axons are surrounded by a fatty insulating material called myelin, which enables the electrical signals to travel down the axon at higher speeds.

Near its end, the axon divides into many fine branches that have specialized swellings called axon terminals or presynaptic terminals. The axon terminals end near the dendrites of another neuron. The dendrites of one neuron receive the message sent from the axon terminals of another neuron.

Figure 3. Diagram of a synapse.
Figure 3

Diagram of a synapse.

The site where an axon terminal ends near a receiving dendrite is called the synapse. The cell that sends out information is called the presynaptic neuron, and the cell that receives the information is called the postsynaptic neuron. It is important to note that the synapse is not a physical connection between the two neurons; there is no cytoplasmic connection between the two neurons. The intercellular space between the presynaptic and postsynaptic neurons is called the synaptic space or synaptic cleft. An average neuron forms approximately 1,000 synapses with other neurons. It has been estimated that there are more synapses in the human brain than there are stars in our galaxy. Furthermore, synaptic connections are not static. Neurons form new synapses or strengthen synaptic connections in response to life experiences. This dynamic change in neuronal connections is the basis of learning.

Figure 4. Neurons relay their information using both electrical signals and chemical messages in a process called neurotransmission.
Figure 4

Neurons relay their information using both electrical signals and chemical messages in a process called neurotransmission.

Neurons communicate using both electrical signals and chemical messages. Information in the form of an electrical impulse is carried away from the neuron's cell body along the axon of the presynaptic neuron toward the axon terminals. When the electrical signal reaches the presynaptic axon terminal, it cannot cross the synaptic space, or synaptic cleft. Instead, the electrical signal triggers chemical changes that can cross the synapse to affect the postsynaptic cell. When the electrical impulse reaches the presynaptic axon terminal, membranous sacs called vesicles move toward the membrane of the axon terminal. When the vesicles reach the membrane, they fuse with the membrane and release their contents into the synaptic space. The molecules contained in the vesicles are chemical compounds called neurotransmitters. Each vesicle contains many molecules of a neurotransmitter. The released neurotransmitter molecules drift across the synaptic cleft and then bind to special proteins, called receptors, on the postsynaptic neuron. A neurotransmitter molecule will bind only to a specific kind of receptor.

The binding of neurotransmitters to their receptors causes that neuron to generate an electrical impulse. The electrical impulse then moves away from the dendrite ending toward the cell body. After the neurotransmitter stimulates an electrical impulse in the postsynaptic neuron, it releases from the receptor back into the synaptic space. Specific proteins called transporters or reuptake pumps carry the neurotransmitter back into the presynaptic neuron. When the neurotransmitter molecules are back in the presynaptic axon terminal, they can be repackaged into vesicles for release the next time an electrical impulse reaches the axon terminal. Enzymes present in the synaptic space degrade neurotransmitter molecules that are not taken back up into the presynaptic neuron.

The nervous system uses a variety of neurotransmitter molecules, but each neuron specializes in the synthesis and secretion of a single type of neurotransmitter. Some of the predominant neurotransmitters in the brain include glutamate, GABA, serotonin, dopamine, and norepinephrine. Each of these neurotransmitters has a specific distribution and function in the brain; the specifics of each are beyond the scope of this module, but a few of the names will arise in reference to particular mental illnesses.
Investigating Brain Function

Mental health professionals base their diagnosis and treatment of mental illness on the symptoms that a person exhibits. The goal for these professionals in treating a patient is to relieve the symptoms that are interfering with the person's life so that the person can function well. Research scientists, on the other hand, have a different goal. They want to learn about the chemical or structural changes that occur in the brain when someone has a mental illness. If scientists can determine what happens in the brain, they can use that knowledge to develop better treatments or find a cure.

Figure 5. Scientists use a variety of imaging techniques to investigate brain structure and function.
Figure 5

Scientists use a variety of imaging techniques to investigate brain structure and function.

The techniques that scientists use to investigate the brain depend on the questions they are asking. For some questions, scientists use molecular or biochemical methods to investigate specific genes or proteins in the neurons. For other questions, scientists want to visualize changes in the brain so that they can learn more about how the activity or structure of the brain changes. Historically, scientists could examine brains only after death, but new imaging procedures enable scientists to study the brain in living animals, including humans. It is important to realize that these brain imaging techniques are not used for diagnosing mental illness. Mental illnesses are diagnosed by the set of symptoms that an individual exhibits. The imaging techniques described in the following paragraphs would not enable the mental health professional to diagnose or treat the patient more effectively. Some of the techniques are also invasive and expose patients to small amounts of radiation. Research studies using these tests are generally not conducted with children or adolescents.

One extensively used technique to study brain activity and how mental illness changes the brain is positron emission tomography (PET). PET measures the spatial distribution and movement of a radioactive chemical injected into the tissues of living subjects. Because the patient is awake, the technique can be used to investigate the relationship between behavioral and physiological effects and changes in brain activity. PET scans can detect very small (nanomolar) concentrations of tracer molecules and achieve spatial resolution of about 4 millimeters. In addition, computers can reconstruct images obtained from a PET scan in two or three dimensions.

PET requires the use of compounds that are labeled with positron-emitting isotopes. A positron has the same mass and spin as an electron but the opposite charge; an electron has a negative charge and a positron has a positive charge. A cyclotron accelerates protons into the nucleus of nitrogen, carbon, oxygen, or fluorine to generate these isotopes. The additional proton makes the isotope unstable. To become stable again, the proton must break down into a neutron and a positron. The unstable positron travels away from the site of generation and dissipates energy along the way. Eventually, the positron collides with an electron, leading to the emission of two gamma rays at 180 degrees from one another. The gamma rays reach a pair of detectors that record the event. Because the detectors respond only to simultaneous emissions, scientists can precisely map the location where the gamma rays were generated. The radioactive chemicals used for PET are very short lived. The half-life (the time for half of the radioactive label to disintegrate) of the commonly used radioisotopes ranges from approximately two minutes to less than two hours, depending on the specific compound. Because a PET scan requires only small amounts (a few micrograms) of short-lived radioisotopes, this technique can be used safely in humans.

PET scans can answer a variety of questions about brain function, including where the neurons are most active. Scientists use different radiolabeled compounds to investigate different biological questions. For example, radiolabeled glucose can identify parts of the brain that become more active in response to a specific stimulus. Active neurons metabolize more glucose than inactive neurons. Active neurons emit more positrons, and this shows as red or yellow on PET scans compared with blue or purple in areas where the neurons are not highly active. (Different computer enhancement techniques may use a different color scheme, but the use of a spectrum with red indicating high activity and blue indicating low activity is common.) Scientists can use PET to measure changes in the activity of specific brain areas in a person who has a mental illness. Scientists can also investigate how the mentally ill brain changes after a person receives treatment.

PET imaging is not the only technique that researchers use to investigate how mental illness changes the brain. Different techniques provide different information to scientists. Another important technique is magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Unlike PET, which reveals changes in activity level, MRI is used to look at structural changes in the brain. For example, MRI studies reveal that the ventricles, or spaces within the brain, are larger in individuals who have schizophrenia compared with those of healthy individuals. Other techniques that scientists use to investigate function in the living brain include single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), and electroencephalography (EEG). Each technique has its own advantages, and each provides different information about brain structure and function. Scientists often use more than one technique when conducting their research.

    Scientists believe that mental illnesses result from problems with the communication system in the brain.

Go to:
The Causes of Mental Illnesses5

At this time, scientists do not have a complete understanding of what causes mental illnesses. If you think about the structural and organizational complexity of the brain together with the complexity of effects that mental illnesses have on thoughts, feelings, and behaviors, it is hardly surprising that figuring out the causes of mental illnesses is a daunting task. The fields of neuroscience, psychiatry, and psychology address different aspects of the relationship between the biology of the brain and individuals' behaviors, thoughts, and feelings, and how their actions sometimes get out of control. Through this multidisciplinary research, scientists are trying to find the causes of mental illnesses. Once scientists can determine the causes of a mental illness, they can use that knowledge to develop new treatments or to find a cure.
The Biology of Mental Illnesses

Figure 6. Scientists understand that mental illnesses are associated with changes in neurochemicals.
Figure 6

Scientists understand that mental illnesses are associated with changes in neurochemicals. For example, in people who have depression, less of the neurotransmitter serotonin (small circles) is released into the synaptic space than in people who do not (more...)

Most scientists believe that mental illnesses result from problems with the communication between neurons in the brain (neurotransmission). For example, the level of the neurotransmitter serotonin is lower in individuals who have depression. This finding led to the development of certain medications for the illness. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) work by reducing the amount of serotonin that is taken back into the presynaptic neuron. This leads to an increase in the amount of serotonin available in the synaptic space for binding to the receptor on the postsynaptic neuron. Changes in other neurotransmitters (in addition to serotonin) may occur in depression, thus adding to the complexity of the cause underlying the disease.

Scientists believe that there may be disruptions in the neurotransmitters dopamine, glutamate, and norepinephrine in individuals who have schizophrenia. One indication that dopamine might be an important neurotransmitter in schizophrenia comes from the observation that cocaine addicts sometimes show symptoms similar to schizophrenia. Cocaine acts on dopamine-containing neurons in the brain to increase the amount of dopamine in the synapse.
Risk Factors for Mental Illnesses

Although scientists at this time do not know the causes of mental illnesses, they have identified factors that put individuals at risk. Some of these factors are environmental, some are genetic, and some are social. In fact, all these factors most likely combine to influence whether someone becomes mentally ill.

    Genetic, environmental, and social factors interact to influence whether someone becomes mentally ill.

Environmental factors such as head injury, poor nutrition, and exposure to toxins (including lead and tobacco smoke) can increase the likelihood of developing a mental illness.

Genes also play a role in determining whether someone develops a mental illness. The illnesses that are most likely to have a genetic component include autism, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, and ADHD. For example, the observation that children with ADHD are much more likely to have a sibling or parent with ADHD supports a role for genetics in determining whether someone is at risk for ADHD. In studies of twins, ADHD is significantly more likely to be present in an identical twin than a fraternal twin. The same can be said for schizophrenia and depression. Mental illnesses are not triggered by a change in a single gene; scientists believe that the interaction of several genes may trigger mental illness. Furthermore, the combination of genetic, environmental, and social factors might determine whether a case of mental illness is mild or severe.

Social factors also present risks and can harm an individual's, especially a child's, mental health. Social factors include

    severe parental discord,
    death of a family member or close friend,
    parent's mental illness,
    parent's criminality,
    overcrowding,
    economic hardship,
    abuse,
    neglect, and
    exposure to violence.

Go to:
Treating Mental Illnesses6

At this time, most mental illnesses cannot be cured, but they can usually be treated effectively to minimize the symptoms and allow the individual to function in work, school, or social environments. To begin treatment, an individual needs to see a qualified mental health professional. The first thing that the doctor or other mental health professional will do is speak with the individual to find out more about his or her symptoms, how long the symptoms have lasted, and how the person's life is being affected. The physician will also do a physical examination to determine whether there are other health problems. For example, some symptoms (such as emotional swings) can be caused by neurological or hormonal problems associated with chronic illnesses such as heart disease, or they can be a side effect of certain medications. After the individual's overall health is evaluated and the condition diagnosed, the doctor will develop a treatment plan. Treatment can involve both medications and psychotherapy, depending on the disease and its severity.

    At this time, most mental illnesses cannot be cured, but they can usually be treated effectively to minimize the symptoms and allow the individual to function in work, school, or social environments.

Medications

Figure 7. Medicines are one part of an effective treatment plan for mental illnesses.
Figure 7

Medicines are one part of an effective treatment plan for mental illnesses.

Medications are often used to treat mental illnesses. Through television commercials and magazine advertisements, we are becoming more aware of those medications. To become fully effective, medications for treating mental illness must be taken for a few days or a few weeks. When a patient begins taking medication, it is important for a doctor to monitor the patient's health. If the medication causes undesirable side effects, the doctor may change the dose or switch to a different medication that produces fewer side effects. If the medication does not relieve the symptoms, the doctor may prescribe a different medication.2

Sometimes, individuals who have a mental illness do not want to take their medications because of the side effects. It is important to remember that all medications have both positive and negative effects. For example, antibiotics have revolutionized treatment for some bacterial diseases. However, antibiotics often affect beneficial bacteria in the human body, leading to side effects such as nausea and diarrhea. Psychiatric drugs, like other medications, can alleviate symptoms of mental illness but can also produce unwanted side effects. People who take a medication to treat an illness, whether it is a mental illness or another disease, should work with their doctors to understand what medication they are taking, why they are taking it, how to take it, and what side effects to watch for.

Occasionally, the media reports stories in which the side effects of a psychiatric medication are tied to a potentially serious consequence, such as suicide. In these cases, it is usually very difficult to determine how much suicidal behavior was due to the mental disorder and what the role of the medication might have been. Medications for treating mental illness can, like other medications, have side effects. The psychiatrist or physician can usually adjust the dose or change the medication to alleviate side effects.
Psychotherapy

Psychotherapy is a treatment method in which a mental health professional (psychiatrist, psychologist, or other mental health professional) and the patient discuss problems and feelings. This discussion helps patients understand the basis of their problems and find solutions. Psychotherapy may take different forms. The therapy can help patients

    change thought or behavior patterns,
    understand how past experiences influence current behaviors,
    solve other problems in specific ways, or
    learn illness self-management skills.

Psychotherapy may occur between a therapist and an individual; a therapist and an individual and his or her family members; or a therapist and a group. Often, treatment for mental illness is most successful when psychotherapy is used in combination with medications. For severe mental illnesses, medication relieves the symptoms and psychotherapy helps individuals cope with their illness.3

Just as there are no medications that can instantly cure mental illnesses, psychotherapy is not a one-time event. The amount of time a person spends in psychotherapy can range from a few visits to a few years, depending on the nature of the illness or problem. In general, the more severe the problem, the more lengthy the psychotherapy should be.3
Go to:
The Stigma of Mental Illness7

    "The last great stigma of the twentieth century is the stigma of mental illness."

    —Tipper Gore, wife of the former U.S. Vice President37

Figure 8. Words can hurt.
Figure 8

Words can hurt. Many derogatory words and phrases are used in relation to mental illness. However, these words maintain the stereotyped image and not the reality about mental illness. Try not to use these words, and encourage students not to use them. (more...)

"Mentally ill people are nuts, crazy, wacko." "Mentally ill people are morally bad." "Mentally ill people are dangerous and should be locked in an asylum forever." "Mentally ill people need somebody to take care of them." How often have we heard comments like these or seen these types of portrayals in movies, television shows, or books? We may even be guilty of making comments like them ourselves. Is there any truth behind these portrayals, or is that negative view based on our ignorance and fear?

Stigmas are negative stereotypes about groups of people. Common stigmas about people who are mentally ill are

    Individuals who have a mental illness are dangerous.
    Individuals who have a mental illness are irresponsible and can't make life decisions for themselves.
    People who have a mental illness are childlike and must be taken care of by parents or guardians.
    People who have a mental illness should just get over it.11

Each of those preconceptions about people who have a mental illness is based on false information. Very few people who have a mental illness are dangerous to society. Most can hold jobs, attend school, and live independently. A person who has a mental illness cannot simply decide to get over it any more than someone who has a different chronic disease such as diabetes, asthma, or heart disease can. A mental illness, like those other diseases, is caused by a physical problem in the body.

Stigmas against individuals who have a mental illness lead to injustices, including discriminatory decisions regarding housing, employment, and education. Overcoming the stigmas commonly associated with mental illness is yet one more challenge that people who have a mental illness must face. Indeed, many people who successfully manage their mental illness report that the stigma they face is in many ways more disabling than the illness itself. The stigmatizing attitudes toward mental illness held by both the public and those who have a mental illness lead to feelings of shame and guilt, loss of self-esteem, social dependence, and a sense of isolation and hopelessness.11, 44 One of the worst consequences of stigma is that people who are struggling with a mental illness may be reluctant to seek treatment that, in most cases, would significantly relieve their symptoms.

Providing accurate information is one way to reduce stigmas about mental illness. Advocacy groups protest stereotypes imposed upon those who are mentally ill. They demand that the media stop presenting inaccurate views of mental illness and that the public stops believing these negative views. A powerful way of countering stereotypes about mental illness occurs when members of the public meet people who are effectively managing a serious mental illness: holding jobs, providing for themselves, and living as good neighbors in a community. Interaction with people who have mental illnesses challenges a person's assumptions and changes a person's attitudes about mental illness.

    Providing accurate information is one way to reduce stigmas about mental illness.

Attitudes about mental illness are changing, although there is a long way to go before people accept that mental illness is a disease with a biological basis. A survey by the National Mental Health Association found that 55 percent of people who have never been diagnosed with depression recognize that depression is a disease and not something people should "snap out of."34 This is a substantial increase over the 38 percent of survey respondents in 1991 who recognized depression as a disease.
Go to:
The Consequences of Not Treating Mental Illness8

Most people don't think twice before going to a doctor if they have an illness such as bronchitis, asthma, diabetes, or heart disease. However, many people who have a mental illness don't get the treatment that would alleviate their suffering. Studies estimate that two-thirds of all young people with mental health problems are not receiving the help they need and that less than one-third of the children under age 18 who have a serious mental health problem receive any mental health services. Mental illness in adults often goes untreated, too. What are the consequences of letting mental illness go untreated?

In September 2000, the U.S. surgeon general held a conference on children's mental health. The former surgeon general, Dr. David Satcher, emphasized the importance of mental health in children by stating, "Children and families are suffering because of missed opportunities for prevention and early identification, fragmented services, and low priorities for resources. Overriding all of this is the issue of stigma, which continues to surround mental illness."45

The consequences of mental illness in children and adolescents can be substantial. Many mental health professionals speak of accrued deficits that occur when mental illness in children is not treated. To begin with, mental illness can impair a student's ability to learn. Adolescents whose mental illness is not treated rapidly and aggressively tend to fall further and further behind in school. They are more likely to drop out of school and are less likely to be fully functional members of society when they reach adulthood.45 We also now know that depressive disorders in young people confer a higher risk for illness and interpersonal and psychosocial difficulties that persist after the depressive episode is over. Furthermore, many adults who suffer from mental disorders have problems that originated in childhood.44 Depression in youth may predict more severe illness in adult life.27 Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, once thought to affect children and adolescents only, may persist into adulthood and may be associated with social, legal, and occupational problems.14

    Mental illness impairs a student's ability to learn. Adolescents whose mental illness is not treated rapidly and aggressively tend to fall further and further behind in school.

The high incidence of mental illness has a great impact on society. Depression alone causes employers to lose over $23 billion each year due to decreased productivity and absenteeism of employees.46 The Global Burden of Disease Study, conducted by the World Health Organization, assessed the burden of all diseases in units that measure lost years of healthy life due to premature death or disability (disability-adjusted life years, or DALYs). Over 15 percent of the total DALYs were due to mental illness.26 In 1996, the United States spent more than $69 billion for the direct treatment of mental illnesses. Indirect costs of mental illness due to lost productivity in the workplace, schools, or homes represented a $79 billion loss for the U.S. economy in 1990.44

Treatment, including psychotherapy and medication management, is cost-effective for patients, their families, and society. The benefits include fewer visits to other doctors' offices, diagnostic laboratories, and hospitals for physical ailments that are based in psychological distress; reduced need for psychiatric hospitalization; fewer sick days and disability claims; and increased job stability. Conversely, the costs of not treating mental disorders can be seen in ruined relationships, job loss or poor job performance, personal anguish, substance abuse, unnecessary medical procedures, psychiatric hospitalization, and suicide.3
Go to:
Information about Specific Mental Illnesses9

A diagnosis of mental illness is rarely simple and straightforward. There are no infallible physiological tests that determine whether a person has a mental illness. Diagnosis requires that qualified healthcare professionals identify several specific symptoms that the person exhibits. Each mental illness has characteristic signs and symptoms that are related to the underlying biological dysfunction. The following sections describe the symptoms and outcomes of three mental illnesses that are highlighted in this curriculum supplement: depression, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, and schizophrenia.
Depression

Depression, or depressive disorders, is a leading cause of disability in the United States as well as worldwide. It affects an estimated 9.5 percent of American adults in a given year.28 Nearly twice as many women as men have depression.25 Epidemiological studies have reported that up to 2.5 percent of children and 8.3 percent of adolescents in the United States suffer from depression.22
The symptoms of depression

Depression is more than just being in a bad mood or feeling sad. Everyone experiences these feelings on occasion, but that does not constitute depression. Depression is actually not a single disease; there are three main types of depressive disorders.23, 27 They are

    major depressive disorder,10
    dysthymia, and
    bipolar disorder (manic-depression).

While some of the symptoms of depression are common during a passing "blue mood," major depressive disorder is diagnosed when a person has five or more of the symptoms nearly every day during a two-week period.27 Symptoms of depression include

    a sad mood,
    a loss of interest in activities that one used to enjoy,
    a change in appetite or weight,
    oversleeping or difficulty sleeping,
    physical slowing or agitation,
    energy loss,
    feelings of worthlessness or inappropriate guilt,
    difficulty concentrating, and
    recurrent thoughts of death or suicide.

When people have depression, their lives are affected severely: they have trouble performing at work or school, and they aren't interested in normal family and social activities. In adults, an untreated major depressive episode lasts an average of nine months. At least half of the people who experience an episode of major depression will have another episode of depression at some point.44

In children, depression lasts an average of seven to nine months with symptoms similar to those in adults.44 Symptoms in children may include

    sadness,
    loss of interest in activities they used to enjoy,
    self-criticism,
    feelings that they are unloved,
    hopelessness about the future,
    thoughts of suicide,
    irritability,
    indecisiveness,
    trouble concentrating, and
    lack of energy.

Children and adolescents with depression are more likely than adults to have anxiety symptoms and general aches and pains, stomachaches, and headaches. The majority of children and adolescents who have a major depressive disorder also have another mental illness such as an anxiety disorder, disruptive or antisocial behavior, or a substance-abuse disorder. Children and adolescents who suffer from depression are more likely to commit suicide than are other youths. As in adults, episodes of depression are likely to recur.44

Dysthymia is less severe than major depressive disorder, but it is more chronic. In dysthymia, a depressed mood along with at least two other symptoms of depression persist for at least two years in adults, or one year in children or adolescents.22 These symptoms may not be as disabling, but they do keep affected people from functioning well or feeling good. Dysthymia often begins in childhood, adolescence, or early adulthood.25 On average, untreated dysthymia lasts four years in children and adolescents.44

A third type of depressive disorder is bipolar disorder, also called manic-depression. A person who has bipolar disorder alternates between episodes of major depression and mania (periods of abnormally and persistently elevated mood or irritability). During manic periods, the person will also have three or more of the following symptoms:

    overly inflated self-esteem,
    decreased need for sleep,
    increased talkativeness,
    racing thoughts,
    distractibility,
    increased goal-directed activity or physical agitation, and
    excessive involvement in pleasurable activities that have a high potential for painful consequences.27

While in a manic phase, adolescents may engage in risky or reckless behaviors such as fast driving and unsafe sex.

Bipolar disorder frequently begins during adolescence or young adulthood. Adults with bipolar disorder often have clearly defined episodes of mania and depression, with periods of mania every two to four years. Children and adolescents with bipolar disorder, however, may cycle rapidly between depression and mania many times within a day.29 Bipolar disorder in youths may be difficult to distinguish from other mental illnesses because the symptoms often overlap with those of other mental illnesses such as ADHD, conduct disorder, or oppositional defiant disorder.
The causes of depression (depressive disorders)

Depression, like other mental illnesses, is probably caused by a combination of biological, environmental, and social factors, but the exact causes are not yet known. For years, scientists thought that low levels of certain neurotransmitters (such as serotonin, dopamine, or norepinephrine) in the brain caused depression. However, scientists now believe that the interplay of factors leading to depression is much more complex. Genetic causes have been suggested from family studies that have shown that between 20 and 50 percent of children and adolescents with depression have a family history of depression and that children of depressed parents are more than three times as likely as children with nondepressed parents to experience a depressive disorder.44 Abnormal endocrine function, specifically of the hypothalamus or pituitary, may play a role in causing depression. Other risk factors for depressive disorders in youths include

    stress,
    cigarette smoking,
    loss of a parent,
    the breakup of a romantic relationship,
    attention disorders,
    learning disorders,
    abuse,
    neglect, and
    other trauma including experiencing a natural disaster.22

    Depression, like other mental illnesses, is probably caused by a combination of biological, environmental, and social factors, but the exact causes are not yet known.

Scientists have studied changes in the brain associated with depressive disorders. Imaging studies using PET have shown that brain activity in certain areas is substantially decreased in a depressed individual whereas activity in other brain regions is increased compared with the same individual after successful treatment.13 PET imaging has also shown that depressed patients have lower neurotransmitter receptor binding potential in some areas of the brain.48 Scientists looking at changes in the brains of bipolar patients found decreases in the size of the cerebellum (the part of the brain that regulates balance and controlled movements), changes in the metabolism of some chemical compounds, and a decrease in the activity of specific brain regions (prefrontal cortex) during the depression phase.42
Treating depression

A variety of antidepressant medications and psychotherapies are used to treat depression. The most effective treatment for most people is a combination of medication and psychotherapy.23

Many of us are aware that medications are available to treat depressive disorders—we see the ads on television and in magazines. Up to 70 percent of people with depression can be treated effectively with medication.44 Medications used to treat depressive disorders usually act on the neurotransmission pathway. For example, some medications affect the activity of certain neurotransmitters, such as serotonin or norepinephrine. Different depressive disorders require different medication therapies. For example, individuals who have bipolar disorder are often treated with a mood-stabilizing drug, such as lithium, during their manic phase and a combination of mood-stabilizer and antidepressant medications during their depressive phase.

Medications usually lead to relief from the symptoms of depression within six to eight weeks. If one drug doesn't relieve symptoms, doctors can prescribe a different antidepressant drug. As with drugs to treat other mental illnesses, patients are monitored closely by their doctor for symptoms of depression and for side effects. Patients who continue to take their medication for at least six months after recovery from major depression are 70 percent less likely to experience a relapse.1

Psychotherapy helps patients learn more effective ways to deal with the problems in their lives. These therapies usually involve 6 to 20 weekly meetings. These treatment plans should be revised if there is no improvement of symptoms within three or four months.44

The combination of medications and psychotherapy is effective in the majority of cases and represents the standard care; however, doctors can employ other methods. One therapy that is highly effective when antidepressants and psychotherapy are not effective is electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), or electroshock therapy.23 ECT is not commonly used in children and adolescents. When ECT is performed, the individual is anesthetized and receives an electrical shock in specific parts of the brain. The patient does not consciously experience the shock. ECT can provide dramatic and rapid relief, but the effects usually last a fairly short time. After ECT, individuals usually take antidepressant medications.

    The combination of medications and psychotherapy is effective in the majority of cases.

A few years ago, the herbal supplement St. John's wort received great attention in the media as an over-the-counter treatment for mild to moderate depression. However, many of the claims did not have good scientific evidence to back them up. The effectiveness and safety of St. John's wort remain uncertain, and its use is generally not recommended.31
Coping with depression

People who have depression (or another depressive disorder) feel exhausted, worthless, helpless, and hopeless. These negative thoughts and feelings that are part of depression make some people feel like giving up. As treatment takes effect, these thoughts begin to go away. Some strategies that can help a person waiting for treatment to take effect include

    setting realistic goals in light of the depression and assuming a reasonable amount of responsibility;
    breaking large tasks into small ones, setting some priorities, and doing what one can as one can;
    trying to be with other people and to confide in someone—it is usually better than being alone and secretive;
    participating in activities that may make one feel better;
    getting some mild exercise, going to a movie or a ball game, or participating in religious, social, or other activities;
    expecting one's mood to improve gradually, not immediately (feeling better takes time);
    postponing important decisions until the depression has lifted and discussing big decisions with family or friends who have a more objective view of the situation;
    remembering that positive thinking will replace the negative thinking that is part of the depression as one's depression responds to treatment; and
    letting one's family and friends help.23

Suicide

A potential, tragic consequence of untreated depression is suicide. In 1997, over 30,000 people in the United States died from suicide, and suicide was the third leading cause of death among 10- to 24-year-olds.22, 25 Over 90 percent of these people had a mental illness, typically either a depressive disorder or a substance-abuse disorder.25 Research from the National Institute of Mental Health estimates that as many as seven percent of adolescents who develop a major depressive disorder become victims of suicide.22

Danger signs that a teen may be considering suicide include

    undergoing dramatic personality change;
    giving away prized possessions;
    writing notes or poems about death;
    talking about suicide, even jokingly;
    making comments such as, "I can't take it anymore" or "I won't be a problem for you much longer";
    previously attempting suicide;
    running away from home; and
    having other symptoms or risk factors for depression, such as difficulty getting along with parents and friends, difficulty in school, or acting bored or withdrawn.

Children and adolescents who are suicidal report feelings of depression, anger, anxiety, hopelessness, and worthlessness. They feel helpless to change frustrating circumstances or to find a solution for their problems. In addition to depression, family conflicts and suicidal death of a relative, friend, or acquaintance are risk factors for suicide among children and adolescents.44 In the case of another person's suicide, children or teens may need intervention to prevent feelings of guilt, trauma, or social isolation. Programs offered by school professionals that address these concerns can be extremely helpful for identifying grieving youths who may need help.

Public health approaches to preventing suicide include establishing telephone crisis hot lines, restricting access to suicide methods (for example, firearms), counseling media to reduce "copycat" suicides, screening teens for risk factors of suicide, and training professionals to improve recognition and treatment of mood disorders. Research about the effectiveness of these methods indicates that the screening and training strategies are more helpful for preventing suicides among young people than the other methods are.44
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)

Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is the most commonly diagnosed behavioral disorder of childhood. In any six-month period, ADHD affects an estimated 4.1 percent of youths ages 9 to 17. Boys are two to three times more likely than girls to develop ADHD.25 Although ADHD is usually associated with children, the disorder can persist into adulthood.19 One researcher6 estimated that as many as two-thirds of the children he evaluated with ADHD continued to have the disorder in their twenties, and that many of those who no longer fit the clinical description of ADHD nonetheless had significant problems at work or in other social settings.
The symptoms of ADHD

The three predominant symptoms of ADHD are impaired ability to regulate activity level (hyperactivity), to attend to tasks (inattention), and to inhibit behavior (impulsivity).19 Individuals who have ADHD may display predominantly hyperactive/ impulsive behavior, predominately inattentive behavior, or a combination of both. Children and adolescents with ADHD

    are often unpopular among their peers,
    have trouble in school,
    have higher injury rates than their peers,
    have difficulty paying attention to details,
    are easily distracted,
    find it difficult and unpleasant to finish their schoolwork,
    put off things that require continued mental effort,
    make careless mistakes,
    are disorganized,
    appear not to listen when spoken to, and
    fail to follow through on tasks.18, 30, 44

The DSM-IV5 specifies several conditions in addition to the symptoms listed above before making a diagnosis of ADHD. For a diagnosis of ADHD, the behaviors must

    appear before age seven,
    continue for at least six months,
    be more frequent or severe than in other children of the same age, and
    cause dysfunction in at least two areas of life, such as school, home, work, or social settings.19

The diagnosis of ADHD can be made reliably using well-tested diagnostic interview methods. However, as of yet, there is no independent valid test for ADHD.

Among children, ADHD frequently occurs along with other learning, behavior, or mood problems such as learning disabilities, oppositional defiant disorder, anxiety disorders, and depression.
The causes of ADHD

The exact causes of ADHD are unknown; however, research has demonstrated that factors that many people associate with the development of ADHD do not cause the disorder. For example, ADHD is not caused by minor head injuries, damage to the brain from complications during birth, food allergies, excess sugar intake, too much television, poor schools, or poor parenting.7, 19 No single cause of ADHD has been discovered. Rather, a number of significant risk factors affecting neurodevelopment and behavior expression have been implicated. Events such as maternal alcohol and tobacco use that affect the development of the fetal brain can increase the risk for ADHD. Injuries to the brain from environmental toxins such as lack of iron have also been implicated.

Scientists have investigated the role of the neurotransmitter dopamine in the development of ADHD because this neurotransmitter plays a key role in regulating movement, increasing motivation and alertness, and inducing insomnia. The observation that ADHD tends to run in families strongly suggests that the disease has a genetic component. Children who have ADHD usually have at least one close relative who also has the disorder.24 One group of researchers found that a child whose identical twin has ADHD is 11 to 18 times more likely to develop the disorder than a nontwin sibling.

Investigations of particular genes involved in ADHD have focused on a dopamine receptor gene (DRD) on chromosome 11 and the dopamine transporter gene (DAT1) on chromosome 5.44 Ongoing studies continue to examine these genes and others as factors in ADHD. Most likely, a combination of several genes and environmental factors determines whether a person has ADHD.

Imaging studies have shown differences in the brains of boys with ADHD compared with boys who do not have ADHD. Researchers found that certain parts of the brain are, on average, smaller in boys with ADHD.8 Other studies found that the total brain volume is smaller in girls who have ADHD than in control subjects; these results match similar findings about the brains of boys with ADHD.9 Scientists have speculated that the changes in the particular brain regions may be involved in the inability to inhibit thoughts, which is a symptom of ADHD.
Treating ADHD

A variety of medications and behavioral interventions are used to treat ADHD. The most widely used medications are methylphenidate (Ritalin), d-amphetamine, and other amphetamines. These drugs are stimulants that affect the level of the neurotransmitter dopamine at the synapse.40 Nine out of 10 children improve while taking one of these drugs.19

When used as prescribed by qualified physicians, these drugs are considered quite safe. Side effects associated with moderate doses are decreased appetite and insomnia. These side effects generally occur early in treatment and often decrease with time. Some studies have shown that the stimulants used to treat ADHD decrease growth rate, but ultimate height is not affected.

Interventions used to treat ADHD include several forms of psychotherapy, such as cognitive-behavioral therapy, social skills training, support groups, and parent and educator skills training. A combination of medication and psychotherapy is more effective than either treatment alone in improving social skills, parent-child relations, reading achievement, and aggressive symptoms.24

    Treating ADHD with a combination of medication and psychotherapy is more effective than either treatment alone in improving social skills, parent-child relations, reading achievement, and aggressive symptoms.

In addition to the well-established treatments described above, some parents and therapists have tried a variety of nutritional interventions to treat ADHD. A few studies have found that some children benefit from such treatments. Nevertheless, no well-established nutritional interventions have consistently been shown to be effective for treating ADHD.24
Coping with ADHD

As the symptoms indicate, ADHD interferes with a person's daily life. Treatment is available to help individuals and relieve the symptoms, but some simple strategies — including those listed below —can also help.

    Asking the teacher or boss to repeat instructions (rather than guessing what they were).
    Breaking large assignments or job tasks into small, simple tasks. Set a deadline for each task and give a reward as each one is completed.
    Making a list of what needs to be done each day. Plan the best order for doing each task. Then make a schedule for doing them. Use a calendar or daily planner to keep on track.
    Working in a quiet area. Do one thing at a time. Take short breaks.
    Writing things that need to be remembered in a notebook with dividers. Carry the book at all times.
    Posting notes as reminders of things to do.
    Storing similar things together.
    Creating a routine. Get ready for school or work at the same time, in the same way, every day.
    Exercising, eating a balanced diet, and getting enough sleep.

Schizophrenia

Schizophrenia affects approximately 1 percent of the population, or 2.2 million U.S. adults. Men and women are equally affected.25, 32 The illness usually emerges in young people in their teens or twenties. Although children over the age of five can develop schizophrenia, it is rare before adolescence.21 In children, the disease usually develops gradually and is often preceded by developmental delays in motor or speech development. Childhood-onset schizophrenia tends to be harder to treat and has a less favorable prognosis than does the adult-onset form.
The symptoms of schizophrenia

There are many myths and misconceptions about schizophrenia. Schizophrenia is not a multiple or split personality, nor are individuals who have this illness constantly incoherent or psychotic. Although the media often portray individuals with schizophrenia as violent, in reality, very few affected people are dangerous to others.32 In fact, individuals with schizophrenia are more likely to be victims of violence than violent themselves.

Schizophrenia has severe symptoms. A diagnosis of schizophrenia requires that at least two of the symptoms below be present during a significant portion of a one-month period:

    delusions (false beliefs such as conspiracies, mind control, or persecution);
    hallucinations (usually voices criticizing or commenting on the person's behavior);
    disorganized speech (incomprehensible or difficult to understand);
    grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior; and
    negative symptoms such as flat emotions, lack of facial expressions, and inattention to basic self-care needs such as bathing and eating.5

However, the presence of either one of the first two symptoms is sufficient to diagnose schizophrenia if the delusions are especially bizarre or if the hallucinations consist of one or more voices that keep a running commentary on the person's behavior or thoughts.5

The DSM-IV specifies additional criteria for a diagnosis of schizophrenia:

    social or occupational dysfunction,
    persistence of the disturbance for at least six months,
    exclusion of a mood disorder,
    exclusion of a substance-abuse or medical condition that causes similar symptoms, and
    consideration of a possible pervasive developmental disorder.44

The course of schizophrenia varies considerably from one individual to the next. Most people who have schizophrenia experience at least one, and usually more, relapses after their first psychotic episode.32 Relapses are periods of more intense symptoms of illness (hallucinations and delusions). During remissions, the negative symptoms related to emotion or personal care are usually still present. About 10 percent of patients remain severely ill for long periods of time and do not return to their previous state of mental functioning. Several long-term studies found that as many as one-third to one-half of people with schizophrenia improve significantly or even recover completely from their illness.44
The causes of schizophrenia

Like the other mental illnesses discussed here, scientists are still working to determine what causes schizophrenia. Also like the other mental illnesses, genetic and environmental factors most likely interact to cause the disease. Several studies suggest that an imbalance of chemical neurotransmitter systems of the brain, including the dopamine, GABA, glutamate, and norepinephrine neurotransmitter systems, are involved in the development of schizophrenia.20, 36

Family, twin, and adoption studies support the idea that genetics plays an important role in the illness. For example, children of people with schizophrenia are 13 times more likely, and identical twins are 48 times more likely, to develop the illness than are people in the general population.44 Scientists continue to look at genes that may play a role in causing schizophrenia. One gene of interest to scientists who study schizophrenia codes for an enzyme that breaks down dopamine in the synapse.12 Investigations to confirm the role of this and other genes are ongoing.

Imaging studies have revealed differences in brain structure and function in individuals with schizophrenia compared with control individuals. Brain imaging studies show that young people who have schizophrenia have structural differences in their brains compared with individuals who do not have schizophrenia. These changes include a reduced total volume of the cerebrum (the upper portion of the brain, which is divided into halves), a reduced amount of gray matter (the tissue that makes up a majority of the brain and consists mainly of neuron cell bodies and dendrites), enlarged brain ventricles (the cavities, or spaces, in the brain that are filled with cerebrospinal fluid), and other abnormalities.38, 39, 41 PET scans of identical twins have revealed that the twin with schizophrenia has lower brain activity in the frontal lobes (the front section of the cerebral lobes) than does the twin who does not have schizophrenia.47 One group of researchers used MRI to periodically scan the brains of teens with childhood-onset schizophrenia and an age-matched control group over a five-year period. They found that teens with schizophrenia lose four times the amount of neurons in a specific region of the brain that teens in the control group lose.43
Treating schizophrenia

There is no cure for schizophrenia; however, effective treatments that make the illness manageable for most affected people are available. The optimal treatment includes antipsychotic medication combined with a variety of psychotherapeutic interventions.44

Since the 1950s, doctors have used antipsychotic drugs, such as chlorpromazine and haloperidol, to relieve the hallucinations and delusions typical of schizophrenia. Recently, newer (also called atypical) antipsychotic drugs such as risperidone and clozapine have proven to be more effective. Early and sustained treatment that includes antipsychotic medication is important for long-term improvement of the course of the disease. Patients who discontinue medication are likely to experience a relapse of their illness.32

People who manage schizophrenia best combine medication with psychosocial rehabilitation (life-skills training).17 Therapies that combine family and community support, education, and behavioral and cognitive skills to address specific challenges help schizophrenic patients improve their functioning and the quality of their lives.

    The optimal treatment for schizophrenia includes antipsychotic medication and psychotherapy.

Go to:
Finding Help for Someone with Mental Illness11

As a teacher, you may occasionally have students who show symptoms of or who have significant risk factors for a mental illness. A first step for helping these students is to contact the school nurse or guidance counselor. These individuals should know the appropriate next steps to take, including directing the student's parents or guardians to contact their physician or their city or county mental health services.

If you think a friend or colleague might have a mental illness, encourage him or her to see a physician. Physicians can make referrals to mental health specialists in the community. In addition, your state or county health departments may offer services for people struggling with a mental illness. The National Mental Health Association has an affiliate network throughout the country. The programs offered by the NMHA affiliates include support groups, public education and advocacy campaigns, rehabilitation, and housing services. You can access the NMHA's affiliate network through its Web site: http://www.nmha.org/nav/section/affiliate.cfm.

The Additional Resources for Teachers section describes other online resources about mental illnesses (page 53).
Go to:
References

1.
    Agency for Health Care Policy and Research. Treatment of depression—newer pharmacotherapies. Summary, Evidence Report/Technology Assessment, Number 7. 1999. Retrieved June 27, 2001, from http://www​.ahcpr.gov/clinic/deprsumm.htm. [PMC free article] [PubMed]
2.
    American Psychiatric Association. Psychiatric medications. 1993a. Retrieved December 18, 2002, from http://www​.psych.org​/public_info/medication.cfm.
3.
    American Psychiatric Association. Psychotherapy. 1993b. Retrieved December 19. 2002, from http://www​.psych.org​/public_info/psythera.cfm.
4.
    American Psychiatric Association. Mental illness (an overview). 1994. Retrieved January 11, 2003, from http://www​.psych.org​/public_info/overview.cfm.
5.
    American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th Edition, Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press; 2000. 
6.
    Barkley RA. Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. 1998. Retrieved July 8, 2001, from http://www​.sciam.com​/1998/0998issue/0998barkley.html. [PubMed]
7.
    Booth B, Fellman W, Greenbaum J, Matlen T, Markel G, Morris H, Robin AL, Tzelepis A. Myths about ADD/ADHD. 2001. Retrieved July 8, 2001, from http://www​.add.org/content/abc/myths​.html.
8.
    Castellanos FX, Giedd JN, Marsh WL, Hamburger SD, Vaituzis AC, Dickstein DP, Sarfatti SE, Vauss YC, Snell JW, Lange N, Kaysen D, Krain AL, Ritchie GF, Rajapakse JC, Rapoport JL. Quantitative brain magnetic resonance imaging in attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry. 1996;53:607–616. [PubMed]
9.
    Castellanos FX, Giedd JN, Berquin PC, Walter JM, Sharp W, Tran T, Vaituzis AC, Blumenthal JD, Nelson J, Bastain TM, Zijdenbos A, Evans AC, Rapoport JL. Quantitative brain magnetic resonance imaging in girls with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry. 2001;58:289–295. [PubMed]
10.
    Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences Education, National Research Council. How People Learn: Brain, Mind, Experience, and School. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2000. 
11.
    Corrigan P, Lundin R. Don’t Call Me Nuts. Tinley Park, IL: Recovery Press; 2001. 
12.
    Egan MF, Goldberg TE, Koachana BS, Callicott JH, Mazzanti CM, Straub RE, Goldman D, Weinberger DR. Effect of COMT Val 108/158 Met genotype on frontal lobe function and risk for schizophrenia. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA. 2001;98:6917–6922. [PMC free article] [PubMed]
13.
    George M. Depression PET scan. 1993. Retrieved July 13, 2001, from http://www​.nimh.nih.gov/hotsci/scandep​.html.
14.
    Jaska P. Fact sheet on attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD/ADD). 1998. Retrieved July 18, 2001, from http://www​.add.org/content​/abc/factsheet.htm.
15.
    Joint Committee on National Health Education Standards. National Health Education Standards: Achieving Health Literacy. Atlanta, GA: American Cancer Society; 1995. 
16.
    Loucks-Horsley S, Love N, Hewson PW, Stiles KE. Designing Professional Development for Teachers of Science and Mathematics. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press; 1998. 
17.
    National Alliance for the Mentally Ill. Schizophrenia. 2001. Retrieved June 27, 2001, from http://www​.nami.org/helpline​/schizophrenia.html.
18.
    National Institutes of Health. Diagnosis and treatment of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. NIH consensus statement. 1998. Retrieved July 8, 2001, from http://odp​.od.nih.gov​/consensus/cons/110/110_statement.htm. [PubMed]
19.
    National Institute of Mental Health. Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. 1996. Retrieved July 3, 2001, from http://www​.nimh.nih.gov/publicat/adhd​.cfm.
20.
    National Institute of Mental Health. Schizophrenia. 1999a. Retrieved July 3, 2004, from http://www​.nimh.nih.gov​/publicat/schizoph.cfm.
21.
    National Institute of Mental Health. Archival record—early recognition and treatment of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder in children and adolescents. 1999b. Retrieved July 17, 2001, from http://www​.nimh.nih.gov​/events/earlyrecognition.cfm.
22.
    National Institute of Mental Health. Depression in children and adolescents: A fact sheet for physicians. 2000a. Retrieved June 27, 2001, from http://www​.nimh.nih.gov​/publicat/depchildresfact.cfm.
23.
    National Institute of Mental Health. Depression. 2000b. Retrieved June 27, 2001, from http://www​.nimh.nih.gov​/publicat/depression.cfm.
24.
    National Institute of Mental Health. NIMH research on treatment for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD): The multimodal treatment study—questions and answers. 2000c. Retrieved June 27, 2001, from http://www​.nimh.nih.gov/events/mtaqa.cfm.
25.
    National Institute of Mental Health. The numbers count: Mental disorders in America. 2001a. Retrieved July 3, 2001, from http://www​.nimh.nih.gov​/publicat/numbers.cfm.
26.
    National Institute of Mental Health. The impact of mental illness on society. 2001b. Retrieved June 27, 2001, from http://www​.nimh.nih.gov/publicat/burden​.cfm.
27.
    National Institute of Mental Health. Depression research at the National Institute of Mental Health. 2001c. Retrieved June 27, 2001, from http://www​.nimh.nih.gov​/publicat/depresfact.cfm.
28.
    National Institute of Mental Health. The invisible disease: Depression. 2001d. Retrieved June 27, 2001, from http://www​.nimh.nih.gov​/publicat/invisible.cfm.
29.
    National Institute of Mental Health. Bipolar disorder. 2001e. Retrieved July 17, 2001, from http://www​.nimh.nih.gov​/publicat/bipolar.cfm.
30.
    National Institute of Mental Health. Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. 2001f. Retrieved June 27, 2001, from http://www​.nimh.nih.gov​/publicat/helpchild.cfm.
31.
    National Institute of Mental Health. Information about St. John’s wort. 2001g. Retrieved July 13, 2001, from http://www​.nimh.nih.gov​/publicat/stjohnswort.cfm.
32.
    National Institute of Mental Health. When someone has schizophrenia. 2001h. Retrieved June 28, 2001, from http://www​.nimh.nih.gov​/publicat/schizsoms.cfm.
33.
    National Mental Health Association. Did you know? Retrieved July 3, 2001, from http://www​.nmha.org/infoctr/didyou.cfm.
34.
    National Mental Health Association. Depression survey reveals dramatic changes in public opinion: Disease or state of mind? 2001. Retrieved July 18, 2001, from http://www​.nmha.org/newsroom​/system/news​.vw.cfm?do=vw&rid=316.
35.
    National Research Council. National Science Education Standards. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 1996. 
36.
    Pearlson GD. Neurobiology of schizophrenia. Annals of Neurology. 2000;48:556–566. [PubMed]
37.
    Pfizer Inc. Mental illness stigma and bias assailed at historic White House conference. Pfizer Views. 2000. Making News. Retrieved July 15, 2003, from http://www​.viewsmakingnews​.com/policy/mental_health.shtml.
38.
    Rapoport JL, Castellanos FX, Gogate N, Janson K, Kohler S, Nelson P. Imaging normal and abnormal brain development: New perspectives for child psychiatry. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry. 2001;35:272–281. [PubMed]
39.
    Rapoport JL, Giedd J, Kumra S, Jacobsen L, Smith A, Lee P, Nelson J, Hamburger S. Childhood-onset schizophrenia. Progressive ventricular change during adolescence. Archives of General Psychiatry. 1997;54:897–903. [PubMed]
40.
    Ratey J. An update on medications used in the treatment of attention deficit disorder. FOCUS Archives, National Attention Deficit Disorder Association. 1998. Retrieved July 8, 2001, from http://www​.add.org/images2/medupdate.htm.
41.
    Sowell ER, Toga AW, Asarnow R. Brain abnormalities observed in childhood-onset schizophrenia: A review of the structural magnetic resonance imaging literature. Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities Research Review. 2000;6:180–185. [PubMed]
42.
    Stoll AL, Renshaw PF, Yurgelun-Todd DA, Cohen BM. Neuroimaging in bipolar disorder: What have we learned? Biological Psychiatry. 2000;15:505–517. [PubMed]
43.
    Thompson PM, Vidal C, Giedd JN, Gochman P, Blumenthal J, Nicolson R, Toga AW, Rapoport JL. Mapping adolescent brain change reveals dynamic wave of accelerated gray matter loss in very early-onset schizophrenia. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA. 2001;98:11650–11655. [PMC free article] [PubMed]
44.
    U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Mental health: A report of the surgeon general. 2000. Retrieved July 8, 2001, from http://www​.surgeongeneral​.gov/Library/MentalHealth/home.html.
45.
    U.S. Public Health Service. Report of the surgeon general’s conference on children’s mental health: A national action agenda. 2000. Retrieved June 27, 2001, from http://www​.surgeongeneral​.gov/cmh/childreport.htm. [PubMed]
46.
    Veggeberg SK. The big story in depression: What isn’t happening. Brainwork—The Neuroscience Newsletter. 1997. Retrieved July 3, 2001, from http:/www​.dana.org/articles/bwn_1097.cfm.
47.
    Weinberger D, Torrey EF, Berman K. Schizophrenia PET scan. 1990. Retrieved July 13, 2001, from http://www​.nimh.nih.gov/hotsci/scanschi​.htm.
48.
    Yatham LN, Liddle PF, Shiah IS, Scarrow G, Lam RW, Adam MJ, Zis AP, Ruth TJ. Brain serotonin2 receptors in major depression: A positron emission tomography study. Archives of General Psychiatry. 2000;57:850–858. [PubMed]

Go to:
Glossary

accrued deficits

    The delays or lack of development in emotional, social, academic, or behavioral skills that a child or adolescent experiences because of untreated mental illness. The mental illness keeps the individual from developing these life skills at the usual stage of life. An individual may never fully make up for these deficiencies.
acute

    Refers to a disease or condition that has a rapid onset, marked intensity, and short duration.
antidepressant

    A medication used to treat depression.
anxiety

    An abnormal sense of fear, nervousness, and apprehension about something that might happen in the future.
anxiety disorder

    Any of a group of illnesses that fill people's lives with overwhelming anxieties and fears that are chronic and unremitting. Anxiety disorders include panic disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder, phobias, and generalized anxiety disorder.
attention deficit disorder (ADD)

    See attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)

    A mental illness characterized by an impaired ability to regulate activity level (hyperactivity), attend to tasks (inattention), and inhibit behavior (impulsivity). For a diagnosis of ADHD, the behaviors must appear before an individual reaches age seven, continue for at least six months, be more frequent than in other children of the same age, and cause impairment in at least two areas of life (school, home, work, or social function).
autism

    A mental illness that typically affects a person's ability to communicate, form relationships with others, and respond appropriately to the environment. Some people with autism have few problems with speech and intelligence and are able to function relatively well in society. Others are mentally retarded or mute or have serious language delays. Autism makes some people seem closed off and shut down; others seem locked into repetitive behaviors and rigid patterns of thinking.
axon

    The long, fiberlike part of a neuron by which the cell carries information to target cells.
bipolar disorder

    A depressive disorder in which a person alternates between episodes of major depression and mania (periods of abnormally and persistently elevated mood). Also referred to as manic-depression.
cerebrum

    The upper part of the brain that consists of the left and right hemispheres.
chronic

    Refers to a disease or condition that persists over a long period of time.
cognition

    Conscious mental activity that informs a person about his or her environment. Cognitive actions include perceiving, thinking, reasoning, judging, problem solving, and remembering.
conduct disorder

    A personality disorder of children and adolescents involving persistent antisocial behavior. Individuals with conduct disorder frequently participate in activities such as stealing, lying, truancy, vandalism, and substance abuse.
delusion

    A false belief that persists even when a person has evidence that the belief is not true.
dendrite

    The specialized fibers that extend from a neuron's cell body and receive messages from other neurons.
depression (depressive disorders)

    A group of diseases including major depressive disorder (commonly referred to as depression), dysthymia, and bipolar disorder (manic-depression). See bipolar disorder, dysthymia, and major depressive disorder.
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th Edition (DSM-IV)

    A book published by the American Psychiatric Association that gives general descriptions and characteristic symptoms of different mental illnesses. Physicians and other mental health professionals use the DSM-IV to confirm diagnoses for mental illnesses.
disease

    A synonym for illness. See illness.
disorder

    An abnormality in mental or physical health. In this module, disorder is used as a synonym for illness.
dysthymia

    A depressive disorder that is less severe than major depressive disorder but is more persistent. In children and adolescents, dysthymia lasts for an average of four years.
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)

    A treatment for severe depression that is usually used only when people do not respond to medications and psychotherapy. ECT involves passing a low-voltage electric current through the brain. The person is under anesthesia at the time of treatment. ECT is not commonly used in children and adolescents.
electroencephalography (EEG)

    A method of recording the electrical activity in the brain through electrodes attached to the scalp.
electroshock therapy

    See electroconvulsive therapy.
frontal lobe

    One of the four divisions of each cerebral hemisphere. The frontal lobe is important for controlling movement and associating the functions of other cortical areas.
gray matter

    The portion of brain tissue that is dark in color. The gray matter consists primarily of nerve cell bodies, dendrites, and axon endings.
hallucination

    The perception of something, such as a sound or visual image, that is not actually present other than in the mind.
hypothalamus

    The part of the brain that controls several body functions, including feeding, breathing, drinking, temperature, and the release of many hormones.
illness

    A problem in which some part or parts of the body do not function normally, in a way that interferes with a person's life. For the purpose of this module, other terms considered to be synonyms for illness include disease, disorder, condition, and syndrome.
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)

    An imaging technique that uses magnetic fields to take pictures of the structure of the brain.
major depressive disorder

    A depressive disorder commonly referred to as depression. Depression is more than simply being sad; to be diagnosed with depression, a person must have five or more characteristic symptoms nearly every day for a two-week period.
mania

    Feelings of intense mental and physical hyperactivity, elevated mood, and agitation.
manic-depression

    See bipolar disorder.
mental illness

    A health condition that changes a person's thinking, feelings, or behavior (or all three) and that causes the person distress and difficulty in functioning.
mental retardation

    A condition in which a person has an IQ that is below average and that affects an individual's learning, behavior, and development. This condition is present from birth.
myelin

    A fatty material that surrounds and insulates the axons of some neurons.
neuron (nerve cell)

    A unique type of cell found in the brain and body that processes and transmits information.
neurosis

    A term no longer used medically as a diagnosis for a relatively mild mental or emotional disorder that may involve anxiety or phobias but does not involve losing touch with reality.
neurotransmission

    The process that occurs when a neuron releases neurotransmitters that relay a signal to another neuron across the synapse.
neurotransmitter

    A chemical produced by neurons that carries messages to other neurons.
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)

    An anxiety disorder in which a person experiences recurrent unwanted thoughts or rituals that the individual cannot control. A person who has OCD may be plagued by persistent, unwelcome thoughts or images or by the urgent need to engage in certain rituals, such as hand washing or checking.
oppositional defiant disorder

    A disruptive pattern of behavior of children and adolescents that is characterized by defiant, disobedient, and hostile behaviors directed toward adults in positions of authority. The behavior pattern must persist for at least six months.
panic disorder

    An anxiety disorder in which people have feelings of terror, rapid heart beat, and rapid breathing that strike suddenly and repeatedly with no warning. A person who has panic disorder cannot predict when an attack will occur and may develop intense anxiety between episodes, worrying when and where the next one will strike.
phobia

    An intense fear of something that poses little or no actual danger. Examples of phobias include fear of closed-in places, heights, escalators, tunnels, highway driving, water, flying, dogs, and injuries involving blood.
pituitary gland

    An endocrine organ closely linked with the hypothalamus. The pituitary secretes a number of hormones that regulate the activity of other endocrine organs in the human body.
positron

    A positively charged particle that has the same mass and spin as—but the opposite charge of—an electron.
positron emission tomography (PET)

    An imaging technique for measuring brain function in living subjects by detecting the location and concentration of small amounts of radioactive chemicals.
postsynaptic neuron

    The neuron that receives messages from other neurons.
presynaptic neuron

    The neuron that sends messages to other neurons by releasing neurotransmitters into the synapse.
psychiatrist

    A medical doctor (M.D.) who specializes in treating mental diseases. A psychiatrist evaluates a person's mental health along with his or her physical health and can prescribe medications.
psychiatry

    The branch of medicine that deals with identifying, studying, and treating mental, emotional, and behavioral disorders.
psychologist

    A mental health professional who has received specialized training in the study of the mind and emotions. A psychologist usually has an advanced degree such as a Ph.D.
psychosis

    A serious mental disorder in which a person loses contact with reality and experiences hallucinations or delusions.
psychotherapy

    A treatment method for mental illness in which a mental health professional (psychiatrist, psychologist, counselor) and a patient discuss problems and feelings to find solutions. Psychotherapy can help individuals change their thought or behavior patterns or understand how past experiences affect current behaviors.
receptor

    A molecule that recognizes specific chemicals, including neurotransmitters and hormones, and transmits the message into the cell on which the receptor resides.
relapse

    The reoccurrence of symptoms of a disease.
reuptake pump

    The large molecule that carries neurotransmitter molecules back into the presynaptic neuron from which they were released. Also referred to as a transporter.
risk

    The chance or possibility of experiencing harm or loss.
risk factor

    Something that increases a person's risk or susceptibility to harm.
schizophrenia

    A chronic, severe, and disabling brain disease. People with schizophrenia often suffer terrifying symptoms such as hearing internal voices or believing that other people are reading their minds, controlling their thoughts, or plotting to harm them. These symptoms may leave them fearful and withdrawn. Their speech and behavior can be so disorganized that they may be incomprehensible or frightening to others.
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)

    A group of medications used to treat depression. These medications cause an increase in the amount of the neurotransmitter serotonin in the brain.
serotonin

    A neurotransmitter that regulates many functions, including mood, appetite, and sensory perception.
single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT)

    A brain imaging process that measures the emission of single photons of a given energy from radioactive tracers in the human body.
stigma

    A negative stereotype about a group of people.
St. John's wort

    An herb sometimes used to treat mild cases of depression. Although the popular media have reported successes using St. John's wort, it is not a recommended treatment. The scientific evidence for its effectiveness and safety is not conclusive.
symptom

    Something that indicates the presence of a disease.
synapse

    The site where presynaptic and postsynaptic neurons communicate with each other.
synaptic space

    The intercellular space between a presynaptic and postsynaptic neuron. Also referred to as the synaptic cleft.
syndrome

    A group of symptoms or signs that are characteristic of a disease. In this module, the word syndrome is used as a synonym for illness.
transporter

    A large protein on the cell membrane of axon terminals. It removes neurotransmitter molecules from the synaptic space by carrying them back into the axon terminal that released them. Also referred to as the reuptake pump.
ventricle

    One of the cavities or spaces in the brain that are filled with cerebrospinal fluid.
vesicle

    A membranous sac within an axon terminal that stores and releases neurotransmitters.
                   Mental health
Mental health is a state of mental well-being that enables people to cope with the stresses of life, realize their abilities, learn well and work well, and contribute to their community. It has intrinsic and instrumental value and is integral to our well-being. 
At any one time, a diverse set of individual, family, community and structural factors may combine to protect or undermine mental health. Although most people are resilient, people who are exposed to adverse circumstances – including poverty, violence, disability and inequality – are at higher risk of developing a mental health condition.
Many mental health conditions can be effectively treated at relatively low cost, yet health systems remain significantly under-resourced and treatment gaps are wide all over the world. Mental health care is often poor in quality when delivered. People with mental health conditions often also experience stigma, discrimination and human rights violations.

Key facts
* Affordable, effective and feasible strategies exist to promote, protect and restore mental health.
* The need for action on mental health is indisputable and urgent.
* Mental health has intrinsic and instrumental value and is integral to our well-being.
* Mental health is determined by a complex interplay of individual, social and structural stresses and vulnerabilities.
Concepts in mental health
Mental health is a state of mental well-being that enables people to cope with the stresses of life, realize their abilities, learn well and work well, and contribute to their community. It is an integral component of health and well-being that underpins our individual and collective abilities to make decisions, build relationships and shape the world we live in. Mental health is a basic human right. And it is crucial to personal, community and socio-economic development.
Mental health is more than the absence of mental disorders. It exists on a complex continuum, which is experienced differently from one person to the next, with varying degrees of difficulty and distress and potentially very different social and clinical outcomes. 
Mental health conditions include mental disorders and psychosocial disabilities as well as other mental states associated with significant distress, impairment in functioning, or risk of self-harm. People with mental health conditions are more likely to experience lower levels of mental well-being, but this is not always or necessarily the case. 
Determinants of mental health
Throughout our lives, multiple individual, social and structural determinants may combine to protect or undermine our mental health and shift our position on the mental health continuum. 
Individual psychological and biological factors such as emotional skills, substance use and genetics can make people more vulnerable to mental health problems. 
Exposure to unfavourable social, economic, geopolitical and environmental circumstances – including poverty, violence, inequality and environmental deprivation – also increases people’s risk of experiencing mental health conditions. 
Risks can manifest themselves at all stages of life, but those that occur during developmentally sensitive periods, especially early childhood, are particularly detrimental. For example, harsh parenting and physical punishment is known to undermine child health and bullying is a leading risk factor for mental health conditions.
Protective factors similarly occur throughout our lives and serve to strengthen resilience. They include our individual social and emotional skills and attributes as well as positive social interactions, quality education, decent work, safe neighbourhoods and community cohesion, among others.
Mental health risks and protective factors can be found in society at different scales. Local threats heighten risk for individuals, families and communities. Global threats heighten risk for whole populations and include economic downturns, disease outbreaks, humanitarian emergencies and forced displacement and the growing climate crisis.
Each single risk and protective factor has only limited predictive strength. Most people do not develop a mental health condition despite exposure to a risk factor and many people with no known risk factor still develop a mental health condition. Nonetheless, the interacting determinants of mental health serve to enhance or undermine mental health.
Mental health promotion and prevention
Promotion and prevention interventions work by identifying the individual, social and structural determinants of mental health, and then intervening to reduce risks, build resilience and establish supportive environments for mental health. Interventions can be designed for individuals, specific groups or whole populations. 
Reshaping the determinants of mental health often requires action beyond the health sector and so promotion and prevention programmes should involve the education, labour, justice, transport, environment, housing, and welfare sectors. The health sector can contribute significantly by embedding promotion and prevention efforts within health services; and by advocating, initiating and, where appropriate, facilitating multisectoral collaboration and coordination.
Suicide prevention is a global priority and included in the Sustainable Development Goals. Much progress can be achieved by limiting access to means, responsible media reporting, social and emotional learning for adolescents and early intervention. Banning highly hazardous pesticides is a particularly inexpensive and cost–effective intervention for reducing suicide rates.
Promoting child and adolescent mental health is another priority and can be achieved by policies and laws that promote and protect mental health, supporting caregivers to provide nurturing care, implementing school-based programmes and improving the quality of community and online environments. School-based social and emotional learning programmes are among the most effective promotion strategies for countries at all income levels.
Promoting and protecting mental health at work is a growing area of interest and can be supported through legislation and regulation, organizational strategies, manager training and interventions for workers.
Mental health care and treatment
In the context of national efforts to strengthen mental health, it is vital to not only protect and promote the mental well-being of all, but also to address the needs of people with mental health conditions. 
This should be done through community-based mental health care, which is more accessible and acceptable than institutional care, helps prevent human rights violations and delivers better recovery outcomes for people with mental health conditions. Community-based mental health care should be provided through a network of interrelated services that comprise: 
* mental health services that are integrated in general health care, typically in general hospitals and through task-sharing with non-specialist care providers in primary health care;
* community mental health services that may involve community mental health centers and teams, psychosocial rehabilitation, peer support services and supported living services; and
* services that deliver mental health care in social services and non-health settings, such as child protection, school health services, and prisons.
The vast care gap for common mental health conditions such as depression and anxiety means countries must also find innovative ways to diversify and scale up care for these conditions, for example through non-specialist psychological counselling or digital self-help.
WHO response
All WHO Member States are committed to implementing the “Comprehensive mental health action plan 2013–2030", which aims to improve mental health by strengthening effective leadership and governance, providing comprehensive, integrated and responsive community-based care, implementing promotion and prevention strategies, and strengthening information systems, evidence and research. In 2020, WHO’s “Mental health atlas 2020” analysis of country performance against the action plan showed insufficient advances against the targets of the agreed action plan. 
WHO’s “World mental health report: transforming mental health for all” calls on all countries to accelerate implementation of the action plan. It argues that all countries can achieve meaningful progress towards better mental health for their populations by focusing on three “paths to transformation”:
* deepen the value given to mental health by individuals, communities and governments; and matching that value with commitment, engagement and investment by all stakeholders, across all sectors;
* reshape the physical, social and economic characteristics of environments – in homes, schools, workplaces and the wider community – to better protect mental health and prevent mental health conditions; and
* strengthen mental health care so that the full spectrum of mental health needs is met through a community-based network of accessible, affordable and quality services and supports.
WHO gives particular emphasis to protecting and promoting human rights, empowering people with lived experience and ensuring a multisectoral and multistakeholder approach. 
WHO continues to work nationally and internationally – including in humanitarian settings – to provide governments and partners with the strategic leadership, evidence, tools and technical support to strengthen a collective response to mental health and enable a transformation towards better mental health for all. 

© 
Mental health in emergencies
Key facts
* Almost all people affected by emergencies will experience psychological distress, which for most people will improve over time.
* Among people who have experienced war or other conflict in the previous 10 years, one in five (22%) will have depression, anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder, bipolar disorder or schizophrenia.
* People with severe mental disorders are especially vulnerable during emergencies and need access to mental health care and other basic needs.
* International guidelines recommend services at a number of levels ? from basic services to clinical care ? and indicate that mental health care needs to be made available immediately for specific, urgent mental health problems as part of the health response.
* Despite their tragic nature and adverse effects on mental health, emergencies have shown to be opportunities to build sustainable mental health systems for all people in need.
Types of problems
There are various types of social and mental health problems in any large emergency.
Social problems:
* pre-existing: e.g. poverty and discrimination of marginalized groups;
* emergency-induced: e.g. family separation, lack of safety, loss of livelihoods, disrupted social networks, and low trust and resources; and
* humanitarian response-induced: e.g. overcrowding, lack of privacy, and undermining of community or traditional support.
Mental health problems:
* pre-existing: e.g. mental disorders such as depression, schizophrenia or harmful use of alcohol;
* emergency-induced: e.g. grief, acute stress reactions, harmful use of alcohol and drugs, and depression and anxiety, including post-traumatic stress disorder; and
* humanitarian response-induced: e.g. anxiety due to a lack of information about food distribution or about how to obtain basic services.
Prevalence
Most people affected by emergencies will experience distress (e.g. feelings of anxiety and sadness, hopelessness, difficulty sleeping, fatigue, irritability or anger and/or aches and pains).
This is normal and will for most people improve over time. However, the prevalence of common mental disorders such as depression and anxiety is expected to more than double in a humanitarian crisis.
The burden of mental disorders among conflict-affected populations is extremely high: WHO’s review of 129 studies in 39 countries showed that among people who have experienced war or other conflict in the previous 10 years, one in five people (22%) will have depression, anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder, bipolar disorder or schizophrenia (1). 
According to WHO’s review, the estimated prevalence of mental disorders among conflict- affected populations at any specific point in time (point prevalence) is 13% for mild forms of depression, anxiety, and post-traumatic stress disorder and 4% for moderate forms of these disorders. The estimated point prevalence for severe disorders (i.e. schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, severe depression, severe anxiety, and severe post-traumatic stress disorder) is 5%. It is estimated that one in 11 people (9%) living in a setting that has been exposed to conflict in the previous 10 years will have a moderate or severe mental disorder.
In conflict-affected settings, depression and anxiety increase with age. Depression is more common in women than in men.
People with severe mental disorders can be especially vulnerable during and after emergencies and they need access to basic needs and clinical care. A review published in 2014 of the health information system from 90 refugee camps across 15 low- and middle-income countries found that 41% of health-care visits for mental, neurological and substance use disorders were for epilepsy/seizures, 23% for psychotic disorders, and 13% for moderate and severe forms of depression, anxiety or post-traumatic stress disorder.
Effective emergency response
WHO-endorsed interagency mental health and psychosocial support guidelines for an effective response to emergencies recommend services at a number of levels – from basic services to clinical care. Clinical care for mental health should be provided by or under the supervision of mental health specialists such as psychiatric nurses, psychologists or psychiatrists.
Community self-help and social support should be strengthened, for example by creating or re-establishing community groups in which members solve problems collaboratively and engage in activities such as emergency relief or learning new skills, while ensuring the involvement of people who are vulnerable and marginalized, including people with mental disorders.
Psychological first aid offers first-line emotional and practical support to people experiencing acute distress due to a recent event and should be made available by field workers, including health staff, teachers or trained volunteers.
Basic clinical mental health care covering priority conditions (e.g. depression, psychotic disorders, epilepsy, alcohol and substance abuse) should be provided at every health-care facility by trained and supervised general health staff.  
Psychological interventions (e.g. problem-solving interventions, group interpersonal therapy, interventions based on the principles of cognitive-behavioural therapy) for people impaired by prolonged distress should be offered by specialists or by trained and supervised community workers in the health and social sector.
Protecting and promoting the rights of people with severe mental health conditions and psychosocial disabilities is especially critical in humanitarian emergencies. This includes visiting, monitoring and supporting people at psychiatric facilities and residential homes.
Links and referral mechanisms need to be established between mental health specialists, general health-care providers, community-based support and other services (e.g. schools, social services and emergency relief services such as those providing food, water and housing/shelter).
Looking forward: emergencies can build better mental health systems
Mental health is crucial to the overall social and economic recovery of individuals, societies, and countries after emergencies.
Global progress on mental health reform will happen more quickly if, during every crisis, efforts are initiated to convert the short-term increase in attention to mental health issues combined with a surge of aid, into momentum for long-term service development. Many countries have capitalized on emergency situations to build better mental health systems after crises.
In the Syrian Arab Republic, despite — or perhaps because of — the challenges presented by the ongoing conflict, mental health services and psychosocial support are becoming more widely available than ever before. Mental health and psychosocial support is now offered in primary and secondary health and social care facilities, through community and women's centres and through school-based programmes, in more than 12 Syrian cities located in governorates severely affected by the conflict. This contrasts with the situation before the conflict, when mental health care was mainly provided in mental hospitals in Aleppo and Damascus.
In Sri Lanka, during the immediate aftermath of the 2004 tsunami, mental health was a key priority. This led to a mental health system reform, supported by WHO, which addressed the shortage of human resources for mental health such as different cadres of dedicated mental health staff. As a result, 20 of the country’s 27 districts now have mental health services infrastructure, compared with only 10 before the tsunami.
When Typhoon Haiyan devastated the Philippines in 2013, there were only two facilities that provided basic mental health services and the number of people able to provide support was insufficient to meet the need. A major scale up of government mental health services was supported by WHO and partners. As a result, 100% of the Philippines general health facilities in the affected region now have staff who are trained in the management of mental disorders.
Mental health should also be a component of national disaster preparedness plans. WHO and the Pan-American Health Organization are supporting countries in the Caribbean sub-region of the Americas so that they will be able to provide adequate mental health and psychosocial support to people in need following hurricanes and other natural disasters.
In many humanitarian and conflict settings, access to quality, affordable mental health care is limited. This access can be further diminished due to public health emergencies such as COVID-19, which tend to disrupt services and increase needs further.
WHO response
WHO is the lead agency in providing technical advice on mental health in emergency situations. In 2022 WHO is operational on mental health in a range of countries and territories affected by large-scale emergencies such as Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Ethiopia, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Nigeria, South Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, Ukraine, the West Bank and Gaza Strip and Yemen. 
WHO co-chairs the IASC Reference Group on Mental Health and Psychosocial Support (MHPSS)in Emergency Settings that provides advice and support to organizations working in emergencies and to country-level MHPSS technical working groups in more than 50 countries affected by emergencies.
The Organization works globally to ensure that the humanitarian mental health response is both coordinated and effective, and that following humanitarian emergencies, all efforts are made to build/rebuild mental health services for the long-term.   
WHO’s advice and tools are used by most large international humanitarian organizations active in mental health. WHO and partners have published a range of practical tools and guidelines to meet the mental health needs of people affected by emergencies.
1. New WHO prevalence estimates of mental disorders in conflict settings: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Mental health and forced displacement
Key facts
* There were an estimated 272 million international migrants in 2019 (1). Refugees, asylum seekers and irregular migrants are of special concern and need protection and support.
* Migrants and refugees can be exposed to various stress factors which affect their mental health and well-being before and during their migration journey and during their settlement and integration.
* The prevalence of common mental disorders such as depression, anxiety, and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) tends to be higher among migrants exposed to adversity and refugees than among host populations.
* Many migrants and refugees lack access to mental health services or experience barriers in accessing these. They also face disruptions in continuity of care.
* The mental health needs of migrants and refugees should be addressed by organizing inclusive and accessible promotion and prevention programmes; strengthening mental health as part of general health services; and ensuring timely diagnosis, treatment, and rehabilitation.
* Migrants and refugees contribute positively to society, but they cannot reach their full potential unless they are in good physical and mental health.
Problems and stressors facing migrants and refugees 
Migrants and refugees often face various problems and stressors which can take place at various stages of the migration process: 
Pre-migration: lack of livelihoods and opportunities for education and development, exposure to armed conflict, violence, poverty and/or persecution.
Migration travel and transit: exposure to challenging and life-threatening conditions including violence and detention and lack of access to services to cover their basic needs.
Post-migration: barriers to accessing health care and other services to meet their basic needs as well as poor living conditions, separation from family members and support networks, possible uncertainty regarding work permits and legal status (asylum application), and in some cases immigration detention.
Integration and settlement: poor living or working conditions, unemployment, assimilation difficulties, challenges to cultural, religious, and gender identities, challenges with obtaining entitlements, changing policies in host countries, racism and exclusion, tension between host population and migrants and refugees, social isolation and possible deportation.
Risk and protective factors for mental health conditions
All of the above-mentioned stressors can increase the risk of developing mental health conditions. For example, unemployment, poor socioeconomic conditions, and lack of social integration among migrants and refugees are risk factors for mental health conditions such as depression. At the same time, these stressors can also exacerbate pre-existing social and mental health problems.
Factors that negatively impact the mental health and well-being of migrant and refugee children include socioeconomic deprivation, discrimination, racism, low family cohesion, and frequent school changes. Children who have been separated from migrating parents are at heightened risk of developing depression, anxiety, suicidal ideation, conduct disorder, and substance use problems.
On the other hand, the impact of stressors can be buffered by protective factors such as access to employment and services, social support, proficiency in the language of the host country, and family reunification. Among resettled refugee children, protective factors include better socioeconomic status, access to education, a perceived sense of safety, contacts with family, living and socialising alongside other people of the same ethnic origin, a stable and cohesive family structure and good parental mental health.
Prevalence of mental health conditions
Many migrants and refugees will experience distress (e.g. feelings of anxiety and sadness, hopelessness, difficulty sleeping, fatigue, irritability, anger and/or aches and pains). For most people, these reactions will improve over time.
Some studies show that the prevalence of common mental disorders (e.g. depression, anxiety and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)) is higher among migrants and refugees than among host populations. Asylum seekers tend to be at elevated risk of suicide. There is also consistent evidence that the incidence of psychoses is higher among migrant populations in a number of countries, and this has been linked with the cumulative effect of social disadvantages before, during and after migration.
Responding to the mental health needs of migrants and refugees
A comprehensive, multi-disciplinary and inclusive approach is needed to address the mental health needs of migrants and refugees.
Overcoming barriers to receiving mental health care
Addressing barriers to receiving mental health care should include:
* provision of clear information on mental health care entitlements and how to receive services (e.g. through reception centers, community outreach, schools, religious or cultural settings);
* outreach to at-risk groups (e.g. unaccompanied minors, persons with disabilities, persons who identify as LGBTIQ+);
* facilitation of affordable and non-discriminatory access to care regardless of legal status, ensuring financial coverage of mental health services and care provided;
* facilitation of communication (e.g. through engaging interpreters and cultural mediators);
* providing person-centred care that is respectful of cultural differences; and
* facilitating the engagement of multiple sectors and systems (e.g. law enforcement, protection, social services and education) to integrate mental health considerations and support and ensure referral and access to mental health services.
Integrating mental health in primary health care
Making mental health care available through general health care can help identify migrants and refugees with mental health conditions and can make care more accessible and cost effective (e.g. see WHO mhGAP intervention guides mhGAP-HIG and mhGAP-IG). The delivery of interventions may require adaptation to migrant and refugee populations to take into account language and cultural considerations. Interventions provided should be consistent with the national guidelines and policies on mental health of the host country.
Ensuring continuity of care
When providing mental health care, an important consideration is related to the length of stay of the migrant or refugee in the host country. The continuity and quality of mental health care of migrants and refugees on the move can be improved by creating international protocols for assuring continuity of care, improving communication among different social and mental health service providers and providing key written information tailored to their needs that migrants and refugees can take with them and share with different providers.
Addressing social determinants and promoting social integration and inclusion
Migration management policies and provision that have proved to have a negative effect on the mental well-being of migrants (e.g. separation of families and children) should be avoided. The social integration of migrants and refugees can be facilitated by equal access to employment opportunities and decent work, vocational training, financial support, social protection services, and legal and law enforcement agencies, as well as mental health care and psychosocial support. The recognition of skills and qualifications acquired pre-migration can also help their integration into the employment sector. Activities and events that promote the social inclusion of migrants and refugees include community forums or peer-mentorship programmes organized by members of the same refugee or migrant group who are already well-integrated into the local community. Special attention is required to support asylum seekers.
WHO response
WHO is the lead International agency in providing technical advice on mental health.
WHO developed a Global Action Plan (2019-2023) to promote the health of migrants and refugees, approved by the World Health Assembly in May 2019. The Global Action Plan describes overarching priorities and guiding principles to promote the health of migrants and refugees and to contribute to achieving the aim of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development – to leave no one behind. The Global Action Plan highlights how the many barriers that migrants and refugees experience in accessing health-care services can precipitate negative mental health outcomes.
The plan recommends priorities and options for action by the Secretariat in coordination and collaboration with the International Organization for Migration (IOM), the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other relevant partners.
In May 2021, the World Health Assembly endorsed an update of the Comprehensive Mental Health Action Plan (2013-2030), with the overall goal to promote mental well-being, prevent mental disorders, provide care, enhance recovery, promote human rights and reduce the mortality, morbidity and disability of persons with mental disorders.
WHO is committed to supporting Member States in promoting the physical and mental health of migrants and refugees by strengthening health care services, as appropriate and acceptable to country contexts and financial situations, and in line with their national priorities and legal frameworks and competence. WHO is also committed to ensuring that essential components are addressed, including the provision of treatment and care for mental and behavioural disorders.
In line with the Global Action Plan, WHO is operational on mental health in a range of countries and territories that host large numbers of migrants and refugees. These include Bangladesh, Colombia, Pakistan, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Pakistan, South Sudan, Sudan, Turkey and Uganda.
WHO has close working relationship with other UN partners, including IOM and UNHCR to meet the mental health needs of migrants and refugees.
WHO co-chairs the Inter-Agency Standing Committee Reference Group on Mental Health and Psychosocial Support in Emergency Settings that provides advice and support to organizations working in emergencies and helps ensure that the mental health response is coordinated and effective. Emergency situations often cause displacement and may lead to people becoming refugees or internally displaced.
WHO’s advice and tools are used by most large international humanitarian organizations active in mental health. WHO and partners have published a range of practical tools and guidelines to meet the mental health needs of people affected by emergencies, including migrants and refugees.

Mental health at work 
Key facts
* Decent work is good for mental health.
* Poor working environments – including discrimination and inequality, excessive workloads, low job control and job insecurity – pose a risk to mental health.
* 15% of working-age adults were estimated to have a mental disorder in 2019.
* Globally, an estimated 12 billion working days are lost every year to depression and anxiety at a cost of US$ 1 trillion per year in lost productivity.
* There are effective actions to prevent mental health risks at work, protect and promote mental health at work, and support workers with mental health conditions.

Overview
Almost 60% of the world population is in work (1). All workers have the right to a safe and healthy environment at work. Work can protect mental health. Decent work supports good mental health by providing:
* a livelihood; 
* a sense of confidence, purpose and achievement;
* an opportunity for positive relationships and inclusion in a community; and
* a platform for structured routines, among many other benefits.
For people with mental health conditions, decent work can contribute to recovery and inclusion, improve confidence and social functioning. 
Safe and healthy working environments are not only a fundamental right but are also more likely to minimize tension and conflicts at work and improve staff retention, work performance and productivity. Conversely, a lack of effective structures and support at work, especially for those living with mental health conditions, can affect a person’s ability to enjoy their work and do their job well; it can undermine people’s attendance at work and even stop people getting a job in the first place.
Risks to mental health at work
At work, risks to mental health, also called psychosocial risks, may be related to job content or work schedule, specific characteristics of the workplace or opportunities for career development among other things. 
Risks to mental health at work can include:
* under-use of skills or being under-skilled for work;
* excessive workloads or work pace, understaffing;
* long, unsocial or inflexible hours;
* lack of control over job design or workload; 
* unsafe or poor physical working conditions;
* organizational culture that enables negative behaviours;
* limited support from colleagues or authoritarian supervision; 
* violence, harassment or bullying; 
* discrimination and exclusion;
* unclear job role; 
* under- or over-promotion; 
* job insecurity, inadequate pay, or poor investment in career development; and
* conflicting home/work demands. 
More than half the global workforce works in the informal economy (2), where there is no regulatory protection for health and safety. These workers often operate in unsafe working environments, work long hours, have little or no access to social or financial protections and face discrimination, all of which can undermine mental health.
Although psychosocial risks can be found in all sectors, some workers are more likely to be exposed to them than others, because of what they do or where and how they work. Health, humanitarian or emergency workers often have jobs that carry an elevated risk of exposure to adverse events, which can negatively impact mental health.
Economic recessions or humanitarian and public health emergencies elicit risks such as job loss, financial instability, reduced employment opportunities or increased unemployment.
Work can be a setting which amplifies wider issues that negatively affect mental health, including discrimination and inequality based on factors such as, race, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, disability, social origin, migrant status, religion or age.
People with severe mental health conditions are more likely to be excluded from employment, and when in employment, they are more likely to experience inequality at work. Being out of work also poses a risk to mental health. Unemployment, job and financial insecurity, and recent job loss are risk factors for suicide attempts.
Action for mental health at work
Government, employers, the organizations which represent workers and employers, and other stakeholders responsible for workers’ health and safety can help to improve mental health at work through action to:
* prevent work-related mental health conditions by preventing the risks to mental health at work;
* protect and promote mental health at work; 
* support workers with mental health conditions to participate and thrive in work; and
* create an enabling environment for change.
Action to address mental health at work should be done with the meaningful involvement of workers and their representatives, and persons with lived experience of mental health conditions.
Prevent work-related mental health conditions
Preventing mental health conditions at work is about managing psychosocial risks in the workplace. WHO recommends employers do this by implementing organizational interventions that directly target working conditions and environments. Organizational interventions are those that assess, and then mitigate, modify or remove workplace risks to mental health. Organizational interventions include, for example, providing flexible working arrangements, or implementing frameworks to deal with violence and harassment at work.
Protect and promote mental health at work
Protecting and promoting mental health at work is about strengthening capacities to recognize and act on mental health conditions at work, particularly for persons responsible for the supervision of others, such as managers.
To protect mental health, WHO recommends:
* manager training for mental health, which helps managers recognize and respond to supervisees experiencing emotional distress; builds interpersonal skills like open communication and active listening; and fosters better understanding of how job stressors affect mental health and can be managed;
* training for workers in mental health literacy and awareness, to improve knowledge of mental health and reduce stigma against mental health conditions at work; and
* interventions for individuals to build skills to manage stress and reduce mental health symptoms, including psychosocial interventions and opportunities for leisure-based physical activity.
Support people with mental health conditions to participate in and thrive at work
People living with mental health conditions have a right to participate in work fully and fairly. The UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities provides an international agreement for promoting the rights of people with disabilities (including psychosocial disabilities), including at work. WHO recommends three interventions to support people with mental health conditions gain, sustain and participate in work:
* Reasonable accommodations at work adapt working environments to the capacities, needs and preferences of a worker with a mental health condition. They may include giving individual workers flexible working hours, extra time to complete tasks, modified assignments to reduce stress, time off for health appointments or regular supportive meetings with supervisors.
* Return-to-work programmes combine work-directed care (like reasonable accommodations or phased re-entry to work) with ongoing clinical care to support workers in meaningfully returning to work after an absence associated with mental health conditions, while also reducing mental health symptoms. 
* Supported employment initiatives help people with severe mental health conditions to get into paid work and maintain their time on work through continue to provide mental health and vocational support.
Create an enabling environment for change
Both governments and employers, in consultation with key stakeholders, can help improve mental health at work by creating an enabling environment for change. In practice this means strengthening:
* Leadership and commitment to mental health at work, for example by integrating mental health at work into relevant policies.
* Investment of sufficient funds and resources, for example by establishing dedicated budgets for actions to improve mental health at work and making mental health and employment services available to lower-resourced enterprises. 
* Rights to participate in work, for example by aligning employment laws and regulations with international human rights instruments and implementing non-discrimination policies at work.  
* Integration of mental health at work across sectors, for example by embedding mental health into existing systems for occupational safety and health. 
* Participation of workers in decision-making, for example by holding meaningful and timely consultations with workers, their representatives and people with lived experience of mental health conditions. 
* Evidence on psychosocial risks and effectiveness of interventions, for example by ensuring that all guidance and action on mental health at work is based on the latest evidence. 
* Compliance with laws, regulations and recommendations, for example by integrating mental health into the responsibilities of national labour inspectorates and other compliance mechanisms. 
WHO response
WHO is committed to improving mental health at work. The WHO global strategy on health, environment and climate change and WHO Comprehensive mental health action plan (2013–2030) outline relevant principles, objectives and implementation strategies to enable good mental health in the workplace. These include addressing social determinants of mental health, such as living standards and working conditions; reducing stigma and discrimination; and increasing access to evidence-based care through health service development, including access to occupational health services. In 2022, WHO’s World mental health report: transforming mental health for all, highlighted the workplace as a key example of a setting where transformative action on mental health is needed.  
The WHO guidelines on mental health at work provide evidence-based recommendations to promote mental health, prevent mental health conditions, and enable people living with mental health conditions to participate and thrive in work. The recommendations cover organizational interventions, manager training and worker training, individual interventions, return to work, and gaining employment. The accompanying policy brief by WHO and the International Labour Organization, Mental health at work: policy brief provides a pragmatic framework for implementing the WHO recommendations. It specifically sets out what governments, employers, organizations representing employers and workers, and other stakeholders can do to improve mental health at work.
 

1. World employment and social outlook - Trends 2022. Geneva: International Labour Organization; 2022 (https://www.ilo.org/global/research/global-reports/weso/trends2022/WCMS_834081/lang--en/index.htm, accessed 26 August 2022)
2. Women and men in the informal economy: a statistical picture. Geneva: International Labour Organization; 2018 (https://www.ilo.org/global/publications/books/WCMS_626831/lang--en/index.htm, accessed 26 August 2022).
Mental health of adolescents 
Key facts
* Globally, one in seven 10-19-year-olds experiences a mental disorder, accounting for 15% of the global burden of disease in this age group.
* Depression, anxiety and behavioural disorders are among the leading causes of illness and disability among adolescents.
* Suicide  is the third leading cause of death among those aged 15–29 years old.
* The consequences of failing to address adolescent mental health conditions extend to adulthood, impairing both physical and mental health and limiting opportunities to lead fulfilling lives as adults.
Introduction
One in six people are aged 10–19 years. Adolescence is a unique and formative time. Physical, emotional and social changes, including exposure to poverty, abuse, or violence, can make adolescents vulnerable to mental health problems. Protecting adolescents from adversity, promoting socio-emotional learning and psychological well-being, and ensuring access to mental health care are critical for their health and well-being during adolescence and adulthood.
Globally, it is estimated that one in seven (14%) of 10–19-year-olds experience mental health conditions (1), yet these remain largely unrecognized and untreated.
Adolescents with mental health conditions are particularly vulnerable to social exclusion, discrimination, stigma (affecting readiness to seek help), educational difficulties, risk-taking behaviours, physical ill-health and human rights violations.
Mental health determinants
Adolescence is a crucial period for developing social and emotional habits important for mental well-being. These include adopting healthy sleep patterns; exercising regularly; developing coping, problem-solving, and interpersonal skills; and learning to manage emotions. Protective and supportive environments in the family, at school and in the wider community are important.
Multiple factors affect mental health. The more risk factors adolescents are exposed to, the greater the potential impact on their mental health. Factors that can contribute to stress during adolescence include exposure to adversity, pressure to conform with peers and exploration of identity. Media influence and gender norms can exacerbate the disparity between an adolescent’s lived reality and their perceptions or aspirations for the future. Other important determinants include the quality of their home life and relationships with peers. Violence (especially sexual violence and bullying), harsh parenting and severe and socioeconomic problems are recognized risks to mental health.
Some adolescents are at greater risk of mental health conditions due to their living conditions, stigma, discrimination or exclusion, or lack of access to quality support and services. These include adolescents living in humanitarian and fragile settings; adolescents with chronic illness, autism spectrum disorder, an intellectual disability or other neurological condition; pregnant adolescents, adolescent parents, or those in early or forced marriages; orphans; and adolescents from minority ethnic or sexual backgrounds or other discriminated groups.
Emotional disorders
Emotional disorders are common among adolescents. Anxiety disorders (which may involve panic or excessive worry) are the most prevalent in this age group and are more common among older than among younger adolescents. It is estimated that 4.4% of 10–14-year-olds and 5.5% of 15–19-year-olds experience an anxiety disorder (1). Depression is estimated to occur among 1.4% of adolescents aged 10–14 years, and 3.5% of 15–19-year-olds (1). Depression and anxiety share some of the same symptoms, including rapid and unexpected changes in mood.
Anxiety and depressive disorders can profoundly affect school attendance and schoolwork. Social withdrawal can exacerbate isolation and loneliness. Depression can lead to suicide.
Behavioural disorders
Behavioural disorders are more common among younger adolescents than older adolescents. Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), characterized by difficulty paying attention and/or excessive activity and acting without regard to consequences, occurs among 2.9% of 10–14-year-olds and 2.2% of 15–19-year-olds (1). Conduct disorder (involving symptoms of destructive or challenging behaviour) occurs among 3.5% of 10–14-year-olds and 1.9% of 15–19-year-olds (1). Behavioural disorders  can affect adolescents’ education and increases the risk of criminal behaviour.
Eating disorders
Eating disorders, such as anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa, commonly emerge during adolescence and young adulthood. Eating disorders involve abnormal eating behaviour and preoccupation with food, accompanied in most instances by concerns about body weight and shape. Girls are more commonly affected than boys. Eating disorders can affect physical health and often co-exist with depression, anxiety and substance use disorders. They occur in an estimated 0.1% of 10–14-year-olds and and 0.4% of 15–19-year-olds (1). They are associated with suicide. Anorexia nervosa can lead to premature death, often due to medical complications or suicide, and has higher mortality than any other mental disorder.
Psychosis
Conditions that include symptoms of psychosis most commonly emerge in late adolescence or early adulthood. Symptoms can include hallucinations or delusions. These experiences can impair an adolescent’s ability to participate in daily life and education and often lead to stigma or human rights violations. Schizophrenia occurs in 0.1% of 15–19-year-olds (1).
Suicide and self-harm
Suicide is the third leading cause of death in older adolescents and young adults (15–29 years) (2). Risk factors for suicide are multifaceted, and include harmful use of alcohol, abuse in childhood, stigma against help-seeking, barriers to accessing care and access to means of suicide. Digital media, like any other media, can play a significant role in either enhancing or weakening suicide prevention efforts.
Risk-taking behaviours
Many risk-taking behaviours for health, such as substance use or sexual risk-taking, start during adolescence. Risk-taking behaviours can be an unhelpful strategy to cope with emotional difficulties and can severely impact an adolescent’s mental and physical well-being.
Young people are especially vulnerable to developing harmful substance use patterns that can persist across the lifespan. In 2019, the prevalence of alcohol use among 15–19-year-olds was high worldwide (22%) with very few gender differences, and showing an increase in consumption in some regions (3).
The use of tobacco and cannabis are additional concerns. Many adult smokers had their first cigarette prior to the age of 18 years.  In 2022, the prevalence of cannabis use among adolescents was higher than that of adults globally (5.5 per cent compared with 4.4 per cent, respectively) (4).
Perpetration of violence is a risk-taking behaviour that can increase the likelihood of low educational attainment, injury, involvement with crime or death. Interpersonal violence was ranked among the leading causes of death of older adolescents in 2021 (1).
 
Promotion and prevention
Mental health promotion and prevention interventions aim to strengthen an individual's capacity to regulate emotions, enhance alternatives to risk-taking behaviours, build resilience for managing difficult situations and adversity, and promote supportive social environments and social networks.
These programmes require a multi-level approach with varied delivery platforms – for example, digital media, health or social care settings, schools or the community – and varied strategies to reach adolescents, particularly the most vulnerable.
Early detection and treatment
It is crucial to address the needs of adolescents with mental health conditions. Avoiding institutionalization and over-medicalization, prioritizing non-pharmacological approaches, and respecting the rights of children in line with the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child and other human rights instruments are key for adolescents’ mental health.
WHO response
WHO works on strategies, programmes and tools to assist governments in responding to the health needs of adolescents.
For example, the Helping Adolescents Thrive (HAT) Initiative is a joint WHO-UNICEF effort to strengthen policies and programmes for the mental health of adolescents. More specifically, the efforts made through the Initiative are to promote mental health and prevent mental health conditions. They are also intended to help prevent self-harm and other risk behaviours, such as harmful use of alcohol and drugs, that have a negative impact on the mental  ?  and physical  ?  health of young people.
WHO has also developed a module on Child and Adolescent Mental and Behavioural Disorders as part of the mhGAP Intervention Guide 2.0. This Guide provides evidence-based clinical protocols for the assessment and management of a range of mental health conditions in non-specialized care settings.
Furthermore, WHO is developing and testing scalable psychological interventions to address emotional disorders of adolescents, and guidance on mental health services for adolescents.
WHO’s Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean has developed a mental health training package for educators for improved understanding of the importance of mental health in the school setting and to guide the implementation of strategies to promote, protect and restore mental health among their students. It includes training manuals and materials to help scale up the number of schools promoting mental health.
(1)  Institute of health Metrics and Evaluation. Global Health Data Exchange (GHDx)
(2) WHO Global Health Estimates 2000-2021
(3) Global status report on alcohol and health and treatment of substance use disorders 2024
  (4) World Drug Report. Geneva: UNODC; 2024(

Mental health of older adults 
Key facts
* By 2030, one in six people in the world will be aged 60 years or over.
* Loneliness and social isolation are key risk factors for mental health conditions in later life.
* One in six older adults experience abuse, often by their own carers.
* Approximately 14% of adults aged 60 and over live with a mental disorder.
* Mental disorders among older adults account for 10.6% of the total years lived with disability for this age group.
 

Overview
The world’s population is ageing fast. In 2020, 1 billion people in the world were aged 60 years or over. That figure will rise to 1.4 billion by 2030, representing one in six people globally. By 2050, the number of people aged 60 years and over will have doubled to reach 2.1 billion. The number of persons aged 80 years or older is expected to triple between 2020 and 2050 to reach 426 million (1).
Older adults contribute to society as family and community members, and many are volunteers and workers. While most have good health, many are at risk of developing mental health conditions such as depression and anxiety disorders. Many may also experience reduced mobility, chronic pain, frailty, dementia or other health problems, for which they require some form of long-term care. As people age, they are more likely to experience several conditions at the same time. 
Prevalence 
Around 14% of adults aged 60 and over live with a mental disorder (2). According to the Global Health Estimates (GHE) 2019, these conditions account for 10.6% of the total disability (in disability adjusted life years, DALYs) among older adults. The most common mental health conditions for older adults are depression and anxiety. GHE 2019 shows that globally, around a quarter of deaths from suicide (27.2%) are among people aged 60 or over. 
Mental health conditions among older people are often underrecognized and undertreated, and the stigma surrounding these conditions can make people reluctant to seek help.
Risk factors 
At older ages, mental health is shaped not only by physical and social environments but also by the cumulative impacts of earlier life experiences and specific stressors related to ageing. Exposure to adversity, significant loss in intrinsic capacity and a decline in functional ability can all result in psychological distress.
Older adults are more likely to experience adverse events such as bereavement, or a drop in income or reduced sense of purpose with retirement. Despite their many contributions to society, many older adults are subject to ageism, which can seriously affect people’s mental health. 
Social isolation and loneliness, which affect about a quarter of older people, are key risk factors for mental health conditions in later life (3). So too is abuse of older people, which includes any kind of physical, verbal, psychological, sexual or financial abuse, as well as neglect. One in six older adults experience abuse, often by their own carers (4). Abuse of older adults has serious consequences and can lead to depression and anxiety. 
Many older people are carers of spouses with chronic health conditions, such as dementia. The responsibilities of such care can be overwhelming and can affect the carer’s mental health. 
Some older adults are at greater risk of depression and anxiety, because of dire living conditions, poor physical health or lack of access to quality support and services. This includes older adults living in humanitarian settings and those living with chronic illnesses (such as heart disease, cancer or stroke), neurological conditions (such as dementia), or substance use problems.
Promotion and prevention 
Mental health promotion and prevention strategies for older adults focus on supporting healthy ageing. That means creating physical and social environments that support well-being and enable people to do what is important to them, despite losses in capacity. 
Key mental health promotion and prevention strategies for healthy ageing include:
* measures to reduce financial insecurity and income inequality;
* programmes to ensure safe and accessible housing, public buildings and transport;
* social support for older adults and their carers;
* support for healthy behaviours, especially to eat a balanced diet, be physically active, refrain from tobacco and reduce alcohol use; and
* health and social programmes targeted at vulnerable groups such as those who live alone or in remote areas and those living with a chronic health condition.
For older adults, social connection is particularly important to reduce risk factors such as social isolation and loneliness. At this stage of life, meaningful social activities can significantly improve positive mental health, life satisfaction and quality of life; they can also reduce depressive symptoms. Example interventions include befriending initiatives, community and support groups, social skills training, creative arts groups, leisure and education services and volunteering programmes.
Protection from ageism and abuse is also critical. Key interventions include anti-discrimination policies and laws, educational interventions and intergenerational activities. A range of carer interventions – including respite care, advice, education, financial support and psychological interventions – can support carers to maintain a good and healthy caring relationship that avoids abuse of older people.
Treatment and care 
Prompt recognition and treatment of mental health conditions (and associated neurological and substance use conditions) in older adults is essential. This should follow standards for integrated care for older people, which is community-based and focused on both the long-term care of older adults living with mental health conditions and declines in intrinsic capacity, as well as the education, training and support of carers. A mix of mental health interventions are usually recommended, alongside other supports to address the health, personal care and social needs of individuals. 
Dementia is often an important concern. It affects people’s mental health (for example, sparking symptoms of psychosis and depression), and requires access to quality mental health care. 
Responding to the abuse of older adults is also critical. Promising interventions include mandatory reporting of abuse, self-help groups, helplines and emergency shelters, psychological programmes for abusers, training of health care providers and other caregiver support interventions. 
WHO response
WHO works with diverse partners on strategies, programmes and tools to support governments respond to the mental health needs of older adults. 
For example, the Decade of Healthy Ageing (2021–2030) is a global collaboration led by WHO to improve the lives of older people, their families and the communities in which they live. 
WHO Member States have also endorsed the Comprehensive mental health action plan 2013–2030, which supports improved mental health and mental health care for all populations, including older adults. 
WHO’s Mental Health Gap Action Programme (mhGAP) provides evidence-based clinical protocols for assessing, managing and following up a set of priority mental, neurological and substance use conditions in non-specialized settings, including depression and dementia. The mhGAP intervention guide includes clinical tips for working with older adults. 
During the COVID-19 pandemic, WHO and partners in the Inter-Agency-Standing Committee (IASC) developed the Living with the times toolkit of illustrated posters to help older adults maintain good mental health and well-being. Other WHO activities to support the mental health of older adults include the development of scalable psychological interventions to address depression and anxiety, research and guidance on interventions to reduce social isolation and loneliness, and cost–effective solutions to prevent abuse of older adults.
 
References
1. World Population Prospect 2022: release note about major differences in total population estimates for mid-2021 between 2019 and 2022 revisions. New York: United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division; 2022 (https://population.un.org/wpp/Publications/Files/WPP2022_Release-Note-rev1.pdf, accessed 12 September 2023).
2. Institute of Health Metrics and Evaluation. Global Health Data Exchange (GHDx).  https://vizhub.healthdata.org/gbd-results/, accessed 20 October 2023).
3. Hong Teo R, Hui Cheng W, Jie Cheng L, Lau Y, Tiang Lau S. Global prevalence of social isolation among community-dwelling older adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2023 Apr;107:104904. doi:10.1016/j.archger.2022.104904.
4. Yon YY, Mikton CR, Gassoumis ZD, Wilber KH. Elder abuse prevalence in community settings: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Glob Health. 2017;5(2):e147–e156. doi:10.1016/S2214-109X(17)30006-2.

Mental disorders 
Key facts
* 1 in every 8 people in the world live with a mental disorder
* Mental disorders involve significant disturbances in thinking, emotional regulation, or behaviour
* There are many different types of mental disorders
* Effective prevention and treatment options exist
* Most people do not have access to effective care
A mental disorder is characterized by a clinically significant disturbance in an individual’s cognition, emotional regulation, or behaviour.  It is usually associated with distress or impairment in important areas of functioning. There are many different types of mental disorders.  Mental disorders may also be referred to as mental health conditions. The latter is a broader term covering mental disorders, psychosocial disabilities and (other) mental states associated with significant distress, impairment in functioning, or risk of self-harm.  This fact sheet focuses on mental disorders as described by the International Classification of Diseases 11th Revision (ICD-11).
In 2019, 1 in every 8 people, or 970 million people around the world were living with a mental disorder, with anxiety and depressive disorders the most common (1). In 2020, the number of people living with anxiety and depressive disorders rose significantly because of the COVID-19 pandemic.  Initial estimates show a 26% and 28% increase respectively for anxiety and major depressive disorders in just one year (2). While effective prevention and treatment options exist, most people with mental disorders do not have access to effective care. Many people also experience stigma, discrimination and violations of human rights. 
Anxiety Disorders
In 2019, 301 million people were living with an anxiety disorder including 58 million children and adolescents (1).  Anxiety disorders are characterised by excessive fear and worry and related behavioural disturbances. Symptoms are severe enough to result in significant distress or significant impairment in functioning. There are several different kinds of anxiety disorders, such as: generalised anxiety disorder (characterised by excessive worry), panic disorder (characterised by panic attacks), social anxiety disorder (characterised by excessive fear and worry in social situations), separation anxiety disorder (characterised by excessive fear or anxiety about separation from those individuals to whom the person has a deep emotional bond), and others. Effective psychological treatment exists, and depending on the age and severity, medication may also be considered.
Depression
In 2019, 280 million people were living with depression, including 23 million children and adolescents (1). Depression is different from usual mood fluctuations and short-lived emotional responses to challenges in everyday life.  During a depressive episode, the person experiences depressed mood (feeling sad, irritable, empty) or a loss of pleasure or interest in activities, for most of the day, nearly every day, for at least two weeks. Several other symptoms are also present, which may include poor concentration, feelings of excessive guilt or low self-worth, hopelessness about the future, thoughts about dying or suicide, disrupted sleep, changes in appetite or weight, and feeling especially tired or low in energy. People with depression are at an increased risk of suicide. Yet, effective psychological treatment exists, and depending on the age and severity, medication may also be considered. 
Bipolar Disorder
In 2019, 40 million people experienced bipolar disorder (1).  People with bipolar disorder experience alternating depressive episodes with periods of manic symptoms.  During a depressive episode, the person experiences depressed mood (feeling sad, irritable, empty) or a loss of pleasure or interest in activities, for most of the day, nearly every day.  Manic symptoms may include euphoria or irritability, increased activity or energy, and other symptoms such as increased talkativeness, racing thoughts, increased self-esteem, decreased need for sleep, distractibility, and impulsive reckless behaviour.  People with bipolar disorder are at an increased risk of suicide. Yet effective treatment options exist including psychoeducation, reduction of stress and strengthening of social functioning, and medication.
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)
The prevalence of PTSD and other mental disorders is high in conflict-affected settings (3). PTSD may develop following exposure to an extremely threatening or horrific event or series of events. It is characterised by all of the following: 1) re-experiencing the traumatic event or events in the present (intrusive memories, flashbacks, or nightmares); 2) avoidance of thoughts and memories of the event(s), or avoidance of activities, situations, or people reminiscent of the event(s); and 3) persistent perceptions of heightened current threat. These symptoms persist for at least several weeks and cause significant impairment in functioning. Effective psychological treatment exists. 
Schizophrenia
Schizophrenia affects approximately 24 million people or 1 in 300 people worldwide (1). People with schizophrenia have a life expectancy 10-20 years below that of the general population (4).   Schizophrenia is characterised by significant impairments in perception and changes in behaviour.  Symptoms may include persistent delusions, hallucinations, disorganised thinking, highly disorganised behaviour, or extreme agitation.  People with schizophrenia may experience persistent difficulties with their cognitive functioning.   Yet, a range of effective treatment options exist, including medication, psychoeducation, family interventions, and psychosocial rehabilitation.  
Eating Disorders
In 2019, 14 million people experienced eating disorders including almost 3 million children and adolescents (1). Eating disorders, such as anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa, involve abnormal eating and preoccupation with food as well as prominent body weight and shape concerns. The symptoms or behaviours result in significant risk or damage to health, significant distress, or significant impairment of functioning. Anorexia nervosa often has its onset during adolescence or early adulthood and is associated with premature death due to medical complications or suicide.  Individuals with bulimia nervosa are at a significantly increased risk for substance use, suicidality, and health complications. Effective treatment options exist, including family-based treatment and cognitive-based therapy.
Disruptive behaviour and dissocial disorders
40 million people, including children and adolescents, were living with conduct-dissocial disorder in 2019 (1). This disorder, also known as conduct disorder, is one of two disruptive behaviour and dissocial disorders, the other is oppositional defiant disorder.  Disruptive behaviour and dissocial disorders are characterised by persistent behaviour problems such as persistently defiant or disobedient to behaviours that persistently violate the basic rights of others or major age-appropriate societal norms, rules, or laws. Onset of disruptive and dissocial disorders, is commonly, though not always, during childhood. Effective psychological treatments exist, often involving parents, caregivers, and teachers, cognitive problem-solving or social skills training.
Neurodevelopmental disorders
Neurodevelopmental disorders are behavioural and cognitive disorders, that? arise during the developmental period, and involve significant difficulties in the acquisition and execution of specific intellectual, motor, language, or social functions.
Neurodevelopmental disorders include disorders of intellectual development, autism spectrum disorder, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) amongst others. ADHD is characterised by a persistent pattern of inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity that has a direct negative impact on academic, occupational, or social functioning.  Disorders of intellectual development are characterised by significant limitations in intellectual functioning and adaptive behaviour, which refers to difficulties with everyday conceptual, social, and practical skills that are performed in daily life. Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) constitutes a diverse group of conditions characterised by some degree of difficulty with social communication and reciprocal social interaction, as well as persistent restricted, repetitive, and inflexible patterns of behaviour, interests, or activities.
Effective treatment options exist including psychosocial interventions, behavioural interventions, occupational and speech therapy. For certain diagnoses and age groups, medication may also be considered.
Who is at risk from developing a mental disorder?
At any one time, a diverse set of individual, family, community, and structural factors may combine to protect or undermine mental health. Although most people are resilient, people who are exposed to adverse circumstances – including poverty, violence, disability, and inequality – are at higher risk. Protective and risk factors include individual psychological and biological factors, such as emotional skills as well as genetics.  Many of the risk and protective factors are influenced through changes in brain structure and/or function.
Health systems and social support
Health systems have not yet adequately responded to the needs of people with mental disorders and are significantly under resourced.  The gap between the need for treatment and its provision is wide all over the world; and is often poor in quality when delivered. For example, only 29% of people with psychosis (5) and only one third of people with depression receive formal mental health care (6). 
People with mental disorders also require social support, including support in developing and maintaining personal, family, and social relationships.  People with mental disorders may also need support for educational programmes, employment, housing, and participation in other meaningful activities. 
WHO response
WHO’s Comprehensive Mental Health Action Plan 2013-2030 recognizes the essential role of mental health in achieving health for all people. The plan includes 4 major objectives:
* to strengthen effective leadership and governance for mental health; 
* to provide comprehensive, integrated and responsive mental health and social care services in community-based settings; 
* to implement of strategies for promotion and prevention in mental health; and 
* to strengthen information systems, evidence, and research for mental health.
WHO's Mental Health Gap Action Programme (mhGAP) uses evidence-based technical guidance, tools and training packages to expand services in countries, especially in resource-poor settings. It focuses on a prioritized set of conditions, directing capacity building towards non-specialized health-care providers in an integrated approach that promotes mental health at all levels of care.  The WHO mhGAP Intervention Guide 2.0 is part of this Programme, and provides guidance for doctors, nurses, and other health workers in non-specialist health settings on assessment and management of mental disorders.  
 

References
(1) Institute of Health Metrics and Evaluation. Global Health Data Exchange (GHDx), (https://vizhub.healthdata.org/gbd-results/, accessed 14 May 2022).
(2) Mental Health and COVID-19: Early evidence of the pandemic’s impact. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2022.
(3) Charlson, F., van Ommeren, M., Flaxman, A., Cornett, J., Whiteford, H., & Saxena, S. New WHO prevalence estimates of mental disorders in conflict settings: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet. 2019;394,240–248.
(4) Laursen TM, Nordentoft M, Mortensen PB. Excess early mortality in schizophrenia. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 2014;10,425-438.
(5) Mental health atlas 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021
(6) Moitra M, Santomauro D, Collins PY, Vos T, Whiteford H, Saxena S, et al. The global gap in treatment coverage for major depressive disorder in 84 countries from 2000–2019: a systematic review and Bayesian meta-regression analysis. PLoS Med. 2022;19(2):e1003901. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1003901.


Anxiety disorders 
Key facts
* Anxiety disorders are the world’s most common mental disorders, affecting 301 million people in 2019.
* More women are affected by anxiety disorders than men.
* Symptoms of anxiety often have onset during childhood or adolescence.
* There are highly effective treatments for anxiety disorders.
* Approximately 1 in 4 people with anxiety disorders receive treatment for this condition.
Overview
Everyone can feel anxious sometimes, but people with anxiety disorders often experience fear and worry that is both intense and excessive. These feelings are typically accompanied by physical tension and other behavioural and cognitive symptoms. They are difficult to control, cause significant distress and can last a long time if untreated. Anxiety disorders interfere with daily activities and can impair a person’s family, social and school or working life.
An estimated 4% of the global population currently experience an anxiety disorder (1). In 2019, 301 million people in the world had an anxiety disorder, making anxiety disorders the most common of all mental disorders (1). 
Although highly effective treatments for anxiety disorders exist, only about 1 in 4 people in need (27.6%) receive any treatment (2). Barriers to care include lack of awareness that this is a treatable health condition, lack of investment in mental health services, lack of trained health care providers, and social stigma.
Symptoms and patterns
People with an anxiety disorder may experience excessive fear or worry about a specific situation (for example, a panic attack or social situation) or, in the case of generalized anxiety disorder, about a broad range of everyday situations. They typically experience these symptoms over an extended period – at least several months. Usually they avoid the situations that make them anxious. 
Other symptoms of anxiety disorders may include:
* trouble concentrating or making decisions
* feeling irritable, tense or restless
* experiencing nausea or abdominal distress
* having heart palpitations
* sweating, trembling or shaking
* trouble sleeping
* having a sense of impending danger, panic or doom.
Anxiety disorders increase the risk for depression and substance use disorders as well as the risk of suicidal thoughts and behaviours.
There are several different kinds of anxiety disorders, including: 
* generalized anxiety disorder (persistent and excessive worry about daily activities or events);
* panic disorder (panic attacks and fear of continued panic attacks); 
* social anxiety disorder (high levels of fear and worry about social situations that might make the person feel humiliated, embarrassed or rejected); 
* agoraphobia (excessive fear, worry and avoidance of situations that might cause a person to panic or feel trapped, helpless or embarrassed); 
* separation anxiety disorder (excessive fear or worry about being separated from people with whom the person has a deep emotional bond);
* specific phobias (intense, irrational fears of specific objects or situations that lead to avoidance behaviour and significant distress); and
* selective mutism (consistent inability to speak in certain social situations, despite the ability to speak comfortably in other settings, primarily affecting children).
People may experience more than one anxiety disorder at the same time. Symptoms often begin during childhood or adolescence and continue into adulthood. Girls and women are more likely to experience an anxiety disorder than boys and men.
Contributing factors and prevention
Anxiety disorders, like other mental health conditions, result from a complex interaction of social, psychological and biological factors. Anyone can have an anxiety disorder, but people who have lived through abuse, severe losses or other adverse experiences are more likely to develop one. 
Anxiety disorders are closely related to and affected by physical health. Many of the impacts of anxiety (such as physical tension, nervous system hyperactivity or harmful use of alcohol) are also known risk factors for diseases such as cardiovascular disease. In turn, people with these diseases may also find themselves experiencing anxiety disorders due to the difficulties associated with managing their conditions.
Effective community based approaches to prevent anxiety include parental education and school-based programmes to enhance social and emotional learning and build positive coping in children and adolescents. Exercise programmes can also be effective in preventing anxiety disorders in adults. 
Diagnosis and treatment
There are several effective treatments for anxiety disorders. People with symptoms of anxiety should seek care. 
Psychological interventions are essential treatments for anxiety disorders and refer primarily to talk therapy with professionals or supervised lay therapists. These interventions can help people learn new ways of thinking, coping or relating to their anxiety, to others or to the world. They can teach people how to face the situations, events, people or places that trigger their anxiety. 
Psychological interventions can be provided to individuals or groups, in person or online. They may also be accessed through self-help manuals, websites and apps. The psychological interventions with the most evidence for treating a range of anxiety disorders are those based on principles of cognitive-behavioural therapy. These include exposure therapy, during which people learn to face their fears.
In addition, learning stress management skills, such as relaxation skills and mindfulness skills, can help reduce symptoms of anxiety disorders. 
Antidepressant medications, such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), can also be useful in treating adults with anxiety disorders. Health-care providers should keep in mind the possible adverse effects associated with antidepressant medication, the ability to deliver either intervention (in terms of expertise, and/or treatment availability), and individual preferences. 
Benzodiazepines, which have historically been prescribed for anxiety disorders, are generally not recommended for anxiety disorders because of their high potential for dependence as well as their limited long-term effectiveness.
Self-care
Self-care can play an important role in supporting treatment. To help manage your symptoms of anxiety and promote your overall well-being, you can:
* avoid or cut down on alcohol and don’t use illicit drugs, which can make anxiety worse;
* exercise regularly, even if it’s just a short walk;
* stick to regular eating and sleeping habits as much as possible and eat a healthy diet; 
* learn relaxation techniques, such as slow breathing and progressive muscle relaxation; and
* develop the habit of mindfulness meditation, even if it’s just a few minutes per day.
WHO response
WHO’s Comprehensive mental health action plan 2013–2030 highlights the steps required to provide appropriate interventions for people with mental health conditions, including anxiety disorders. 
Generalized anxiety disorder and panic disorder are included in the priority conditions covered by WHO’s mhGAP Programme. This programme aims to help countries increase services for people with mental, neurological and substance use disorders through care provided by health workers who are not specialists in mental health. 
WHO has developed brief psychological intervention manuals that may be delivered by lay therapists to individuals and groups. These interventions have been shown to be effective for multiple mental health problems, including anxiety and depression. An example is the Problem management plus (PM+) manual, which is based on principles of cognitive behavioural therapy and uses techniques like stress management, problem solving treatment and strengthening social support. Additionally, the Self-Help Plus (SH+) group-based stress management course and WHO’s popular Doing What Matters in Times of Stress self-help book describe skills that can be used to reduce anxiety and stress. 
 
References
1. GBD Results Tool. In: Global Health Data Exchange [website]. Seattle: Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation; 2019 (https://vizhub.healthdata.org/gbd-results?params=gbd-api-2019-permalink/716f37e05d94046d6a06c1194a8eb0c9, accessed 5 September 2023).
2. Alonso J, Liu Z, Evans-Lacko S, et al. Treatment gap for anxiety disorders is global: results of the World Mental Health Surveys in 21 countries. Depress Anxiety. 2018;35(3):195–208. doi:10.1002/da.22711.

Bipolar disorder 
Key facts
* Bipolar disorder is a mental health condition that affects a person’s mood, energy, activity and thought and is characterized by manic (or hypomanic) and depressive episodes.
* An estimated 40 million people live with bipolar disorder worldwide.
* Bipolar disorder is associated with significant disability and difficulties in many areas of life.
* Many people with bipolar disorder are misdiagnosed or untreated and experience discrimination and stigma.
* There are a range of effective care options, which combine medicines and psychosocial interventions to help people with bipolar disorder stay well.

Overview
In 2019, approximately 1 in 150 adults (40 million people, or 0.53% of the global population) were living with bipolar disorder (1). The condition is primarily observed among working-age people, but also in youth. While the prevalence of bipolar disorder among men and women is approximately equal, available data indicate that women are more often diagnosed. 
Worldwide, the treatment coverage for people with bipolar disorder is low. Both men and women are often misdiagnosed. Many lack access to services and recommended interventions, especially in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs).
Stigma and discrimination against people with bipolar disorder are widespread, both in communities and health services. This can undermine access to health care. It also fuels social exclusion and can limit opportunities for education, employment and housing.
Bipolar disorder is one of the leading causes of disability globally as it can affect many areas of life. People with bipolar disorder may experience strained relationships, problems at school or work, and difficulties in carrying out daily activities. Having bipolar disorder also increases the risk of suicide and of developing anxiety and substance use disorders.
People with bipolar disorder are more likely to smoke, use alcohol, have a physical health condition (e.g. cardiovascular or respiratory disease), and experience difficulties in accessing health care. On average, people with bipolar disorder die more than 10 years earlier than the general population (2). 
Symptoms and patterns
Bipolar disorder is a mental health condition characterized by mood swings from one extreme to another.
During a manic episode, a person experiences an extremely high mood with lots of energy (feeling very happy, excited, overactive). They may have a sense of euphoria, sudden shifts in mood or an excess of emotion (uncontrollable laughing or feeling much more irritable, agitated or restless than usual). 
In manic episodes, the changes in mood and activities are accompanied by other characteristic symptoms, which may include:
* highly inflated sense of self-worth or self-esteem;
* talking quickly and rapidly shifting from one idea to the next; 
* having trouble concentrating and being easily distracted;
* decreased need for sleep;
* reckless or risk-taking behaviour, for example overspending, risky sexual activity, drinking, or harming oneself or others; and 
* fixed and mistaken grandiose or persecutory beliefs in something untrue (e.g. “I am a very famous person”, “My neighbour is spying on me”). 
On the contrary, during a depressive episode, a person experiences a depressed mood (feeling sad, irritable, empty). They may feel a loss of interest or pleasure in activities that they had previously enjoyed. 
Other symptoms are also present, which may include: 
* poor concentration
* feelings of excessive guilt or low self-worth
* hopelessness about the future
* thoughts about dying or suicide
* disrupted sleep
* changes in appetite or weight
* feeling very tired or low in energy.
A depressive episode is different from mood fluctuations commonly experienced by most people, in that the symptoms last most of the day, nearly every day, for at least two weeks.
Both manic and depressive episodes can cause significant difficulties in all aspects of life, including at home, work and school. They may require specialized care to prevent the person from doing harm to themselves or others. 
Some people with bipolar disorder may experience what are called hypomanic episodes. Hypomanic episodes involve similar symptoms to manic episodes, but the symptoms are less intense and do not typically disrupt the person’s ability to function to the same extent. 
There are two main types of bipolar disorder, depending on patterns of manic or hypomanic and depressive episodes. 
* People with bipolar type I disorder experience one or more manic episodes interspaced with episodes of depression which usually become more common over time (compared with manic episodes). 
* People with bipolar type II disorder have had one or more hypomanic episodes and at least one depressive episode, but no history of manic episodes. 
Risks and protective factors 
The exact cause of bipolar disorder is unknown. Several factors – including biological (e.g. genetic), psychological, social and structural factors – may contribute to its onset, trajectory and outcomes. 
Adverse circumstances or life-altering events can trigger or exacerbate the symptoms of bipolar disorder. These may include bereavement, violence or the breakdown of a relationship. The use of alcohol or drugs can also influence the onset and trajectory of bipolar disorder.
Although employment can be a source of stress for people living with bipolar disorder, it can also be protective. Under good working conditions, and when supported at their workplace with reasonable adjustments, employment can promote recovery by improving functioning, reducing symptoms and leading to a higher quality of life and improved self-esteem.
Treatment and care
Even though symptoms often recur, recovery is possible. With appropriate care, people with bipolar disorder can cope with their symptoms and live meaningful and productive lives.
There are a range of effective treatment options, typically a mix of medicines and psychological and psychosocial interventions. Medicines are considered essential for treatment, but themselves are usually insufficient to achieve full recovery. People with bipolar disorder should be treated with respect and dignity and should be meaningfully involved in care choices, including through shared decision-making regarding treatment and care, balancing effectiveness, side-effects and individual preferences. 
Medicines
People with bipolar disorder need treatment and care across acute episodes of mania and depression and when indicated, longer-term treatment to prevent relapse. 
Mood stabilizers (such as lithium, valproate) and antipsychotics are proven to help manage acute mania. Lithium prescription requires clinical and laboratory monitoring. Girls and women who are pregnant, breastfeeding or have childbearing potential should not use valproate. Lithium and carbamazepine also need to be avoided during pregnancy and breastfeeding whenever possible. 
Antidepressants should not be taken during a manic episode and they may be combined with mood stabilizers or antipsychotics during episodes of depression. 
Some medicines for bipolar disorder can make people feel sleepy, have involuntary muscle spasms or tremors, or experience metabolic changes (e.g. involving weight gain). These side effects can affect adherence to treatment and should be monitored and managed.  
Adults with bipolar disorder who are in complete remission (no symptoms) usually need to continue with mood stabilizers or antipsychotic medicines for at least six months. Those experiencing multiple episodes of mania and depression will usually require longer-term treatment to minimize relapses.
Psychological and psychosocial interventions
People with bipolar disorder can benefit from lifestyle changes involving regular sleep, physical activity, a healthy diet, reduction of stressors, and mood monitoring. 
Psychological interventions (e.g. cognitive behavioural therapy, interpersonal therapy, psychoeducation) can effectively reduce depressive symptoms and the possibility of them coming back. 
Family psychoeducation can also help families understand and support their loved one better. Support from family and friends is very important. Support groups – where people can receive encouragement, learn coping skills, and share experiences – can be helpful to people with bipolar disorder and their families.
Recovery-oriented psychosocial interventions include supported employment, supported housing, peer support, and social and life skills training. They serve to promote hope and to support the autonomy, personal empowerment and social inclusion of people with bipolar disorder.  
Medicines and psychological or psychosocial interventions should be tailored to the needs of the person and combined for best outcomes.  
WHO response
The Comprehensive Mental Health Action Plan 2013-2030 highlights the steps needed to provide appropriate services for people with mental health conditions, including bipolar disorder. The WHO Special Initiative for Mental Health aims to further progress towards the plan’s objectives by ensuring 100 million more people can access quality and affordable care for mental health conditions.
WHO's Mental Health Gap Action Programme (mhGAP), which is being implemented in more than 100 countries, provides evidence-based technical guidance, tools and training packages to build capacities and expand treatment coverage for a set of priority conditions, including bipolar disorder, in non-specialized settings in LMICs. 
WHO’s guidelines on Management of physical health conditions in adults with severe mental disorders provide evidence-based recommendations to practitioners on how to recognize and manage comorbid physical and mental health conditions, including bipolar disorder.
WHO’s QualityRights initiative aims to improve the quality of care and human rights standards in mental health and social care facilities and to empower organizations to advocate for the health of people with mental health conditions, including bipolar disorder. 
The Guidance on community mental health services and person-centred and rights-based approaches describes what person-centred and human rights-based approaches look like in mental health, and give examples of good practice services.
 
References
1. GBD 2019 Mental Disorders Collaborators. Global, regional, and national burden of 12 mental disorders in 204 countries and territories, 1990–2019: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. Lancet Psychiatry. 2022;9:137–50. doi:10.1016/S2215-0366(21)00395-3.
2. Kwun Nam Chan J, Ho Yi Yong C, Sau Man Wong C, Yu Hai Chen E, Chung Chang W. Life expectancy and years of potential life lost in bipolar disorder: systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Psychiatry. 2022;221(3):567–76. doi:10.1192/bjp.2022.19.

Depressive disorder (depression)
Key facts
* Depression is a common mental disorder.
* Globally, an estimated 5% of adults suffer from depression.
* More women are affected by depression than men.
* Depression can lead to suicide.
* There is effective treatment for mild, moderate and severe depression.
Overview
Depressive disorder (also known as depression) is a common mental disorder. It involves a depressed mood or loss of pleasure or interest in activities for long periods of time.
Depression is different from regular mood changes and feelings about everyday life. It can affect all aspects of life, including relationships with family, friends and community. It can result from or lead to problems at school and at work.
Depression can happen to anyone. People who have lived through abuse, severe losses or other stressful events are more likely to develop depression. Women are more likely to have depression than men.
An estimated 3.8% of the population experience depression, including 5% of adults (4% among men and 6% among women), and 5.7% of adults older than 60 years. Approximately 280 million people in the world have depression (1). Depression is about 50% more common among women than among men. Worldwide, more than 10% of pregnant women and women who have just given birth experience depression (2). More than 700 000 people die due to suicide every year. Suicide is the fourth leading cause of death in 15–29-year-olds.
Although there are known, effective treatments for mental disorders, more than 75% of people in low- and middle-income countries receive no treatment (3). Barriers to effective care include a lack of investment in mental health care, lack of trained health-care providers and social stigma associated with mental disorders. 
Symptoms and patterns
During a depressive episode, a person experiences a depressed mood (feeling sad, irritable, empty). They may feel a loss of pleasure or interest in activities.
A depressive episode is different from regular mood fluctuations. They last most of the day, nearly every day, for at least two weeks.
Other symptoms are also present, which may include:
* poor concentration
* feelings of excessive guilt or low self-worth
* hopelessness about the future
* thoughts about dying or suicide
* disrupted sleep
* changes in appetite or weight
* feeling very tired or low in energy.
Depression can cause difficulties in all aspects of life, including in the community and at home, work and school.
A depressive episode can be categorized as mild, moderate, or severe depending on the number and severity of symptoms, as well as the impact on the individual’s functioning. 
There are different patterns of depressive episodes including:
* single episode depressive disorder, meaning the person’s first and only episode;
* recurrent depressive disorder, meaning the person has a history of at least two depressive episodes; and
* bipolar disorder, meaning that depressive episodes alternate with periods of manic symptoms, which include euphoria or irritability, increased activity or energy, and other symptoms such as increased talkativeness, racing thoughts, increased self-esteem, decreased need for sleep, distractibility, and impulsive reckless behaviour.  
Contributing factors and prevention
Depression results from a complex interaction of social, psychological, and biological factors. People who have gone through adverse life events (unemployment, bereavement, traumatic events) are more likely to develop depression. Depression can, in turn, lead to more stress and dysfunction and worsen the affected person’s life situation and the depression itself.
Depression is closely related to and affected by physical health. Many of the factors that influence depression (such as physical inactivity or harmful use of alcohol) are also known risk factors for diseases such as cardiovascular disease, cancer, diabetes and respiratory diseases. In turn, people with these diseases may also find themselves experiencing depression due to the difficulties associated with managing their condition.
Prevention programmes have been shown to reduce depression. Effective community approaches to prevent depression include school-based programmes to enhance a pattern of positive coping in children and adolescents. Interventions for parents of children with behavioural problems may reduce parental depressive symptoms and improve outcomes for their children. Exercise programmes for older persons can also be effective in depression prevention.
Diagnosis and treatment
There are effective treatments for depression. These include psychological treatment and medications. Seek care if you have symptoms of depression.
Psychological treatments are the first treatments for depression. They can be combined with antidepressant medications in moderate and severe depression. Antidepressant medications are not needed for mild depression.
Psychological treatments can teach new ways of thinking, coping or relating to others. They may include talk therapy with professionals and supervised lay therapists. Talk therapy can happen in person or online. Psychological treatments may be accessed through self-help manuals, websites and apps. 
Effective psychological treatments for depression include:   
* behavioural activation
* cognitive behavioural therapy
* interpersonal psychotherapy
* problem-solving therapy.
Antidepressant medications include selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), such as fluoxetine.
Health-care providers should keep in mind the possible adverse effects associated with antidepressant medication, the ability to deliver either intervention (in terms of expertise, and/or treatment availability), and individual preferences. 
Antidepressants should not be used for treating depression in children and are not the first line of treatment in adolescents, among whom they should be used with extra caution.
Different medications and treatments are used for bipolar disorder. 
Self-care
Self-care can play an important role in managing symptoms of depression and promoting overall well-being.
What you can do:
* try to keep doing activities you used to enjoy
* stay connected to friends and family
* exercise regularly, even if it’s just a short walk
* stick to regular eating and sleeping habits as much as possible
* avoid or cut down on alcohol and don’t use illicit drugs, which can make depression worse
* talk to someone you trust about your feelings 
* seek help from a healthcare provider.
If you have thoughts of suicide:
* remember you are not alone, and that many people have gone through what you’re experiencing and found help
* talk to someone you trust about how you feel
* talk to a health worker, such as a doctor or counsellor
* join a support group.
If you think you are in immediate danger of harming yourself, contact any available emergency services or a crisis line.
WHO response
WHO’s Mental health action plan 2013–2030 highlights the steps required to provide appropriate interventions for people with mental disorders including depression. 
Depression and self-harm/suicide are among the priority conditions covered by WHO’s Mental Health Gap Action Programme (mhGAP). The Programme aims to help countries increase services for people with mental, neurological and substance use disorders through care provided by health workers who are not specialists in mental health. 
WHO has developed brief psychological intervention manuals for depression that may be delivered by lay therapists to individuals and groups. An example is the Problem management plus (PM+) manual, which describes the use of behavioural activation, stress management, problem solving treatment and strengthening social support. Moreover, the Group interpersonal therapy for depression manual describes group treatment of depression. Finally, the Thinking healthy manual covers the use of cognitive-behavioural therapy for perinatal depression.
 
References
1. Institute of Health Metrics and Evaluation. Global Health Data Exchange (GHDx).  https://vizhub.healthdata.org/gbd-results/ (Accessed 4 March 2023).
2. Woody CA, Ferrari AJ, Siskind DJ, Whiteford HA, Harris MG. A systematic review and meta-regression of the prevalence and incidence of perinatal depression. J Affect Disord. 2017;219:86–92. 
3. Evans-Lacko S, Aguilar-Gaxiola S, Al-Hamzawi A, et al. Socio-economic variations in the mental health treatment gap for people with anxiety, mood, and substance use disorders: results from the WHO World Mental Health (WMH) surveys. Psychol Med. 2018;48(9):1560-1571. 

Schizophrenia 
Key facts
* Schizophrenia causes psychosis and is associated with considerable disability and may affect all areas of life including personal, family, social, educational, and occupational functioning.
* Stigma, discrimination, and violation of human rights of people with schizophrenia are common.
* More than two out of three people with psychosis in the world do not receive specialist mental health care.
* A range of effective care options for people with schizophrenia exist and at least one in three people with schizophrenia will be able to fully recover.
Symptoms
Schizophrenia is characterised by significant impairments in the way reality is perceived and changes in behaviour related to:
* persistent delusions: the person has fixed beliefs that something is true, despite evidence to the contrary;
* persistent hallucinations: the person may hear, smell, see, touch, or feel things that are not there;
* experiences of influence, control or passivity: the experience that one’s feelings, impulses, actions, or thoughts are not generated by oneself, are being placed in one’s mind or withdrawn from one’s mind by others, or that one’s thoughts are being broadcast to others; 
* disorganized thinking, which is often observed as jumbled or irrelevant speech;
* highly disorganised behaviour e.g. the person does things that appear bizarre or purposeless, or the person has unpredictable or inappropriate emotional responses that interfere with their ability to organise their behaviour; 
* “negative symptoms” such as very limited speech, restricted experience and expression of emotions, inability to experience interest or pleasure, and social withdrawal; and/or  
* extreme agitation or slowing of movements, maintenance of unusual postures.
People with schizophrenia often also experience persistent difficulties with their cognitive or thinking skills, such as memory, attention, and problem-solving.
At least one third of people with schizophrenia experiences complete remission of symptoms (1). Some people with schizophrenia experience worsening and remission of symptoms periodically throughout their lives, others a gradual worsening of symptoms over time.
Magnitude and impact
Schizophrenia affects approximately 24 million people or 1 in 300 people (0.32%) worldwide. This rate is 1 in 222 people (0.45%) among adults (2). It is not as common as many other mental disorders. Onset is most often during late adolescence and the twenties, and onset tends to happen earlier among men than among women. 
Schizophrenia is frequently associated with significant distress and impairment in personal, family, social, educational, occupational, and other important areas of life. 
People with schizophrenia are 2 to 3 times more likely to die early than the general population (3). This is often due to physical illnesses, such as cardiovascular, metabolic, and infectious diseases.
People with schizophrenia often experience human rights violations both inside mental health institutions and in community settings. Stigma against people with this condition is intense and widespread, causing social exclusion, and impacting their relationships with others, including family and friends. This contributes to discrimination, which in turn can limit access to general health care, education, housing, and employment.  
During humanitarian and public health emergencies, extreme stress and fear, breakdown of social supports, isolation and disruption of health-care services and supply of medication can occur. These changes can have an impact on the lives of people with schizophrenia, such as exacerbation of existing symptoms. During emergencies, people with schizophrenia are more vulnerable than others to various human rights violations, including neglect, abandonment, homelessness, abuse and exclusion. 
Causes of schizophrenia
Research has not identified one single cause of schizophrenia. It is thought that an interaction between genes and a range of environmental factors may cause schizophrenia.  Psychosocial factors may also affect the onset and course of schizophrenia. Heavy use of cannabis is associated with an elevated risk of the disorder. 
Services
Currently, the vast majority of people with schizophrenia around the world are not receiving mental health care. Approximately 50% of people in mental hospitals have a schizophrenia diagnosis (4). Only 31.3% of people with psychosis receive specialist mental health care (5). Most resources for mental health services are inefficiently spent on care within mental hospitals.
There is clear evidence that mental hospitals are not effective in providing the care that people with mental health conditions need and, regularly, violate the basic human rights of persons with schizophrenia. Efforts to transfer care from mental health institutions to the community need to be expanded and accelerated. Such efforts start with the development of a range of quality community-based mental health services. Options for community-based mental health care include integration in primary health and general hospital care, community mental health centres, day centres, supported housing, and outreach services for home-based support. The engagement of the person with schizophrenia, family members and the wider community in providing support is important.
Management and support
A range of effective care options for people with schizophrenia exist, and these include medication, psychoeducation, family interventions, cognitive-behavioural therapy and psychosocial rehabilitation (e.g., life skills  training). Facilitated assisted living, supported housing and supported employment are essential care options that should be available for people with schizophrenia.  A recovery-oriented approach – giving people agency in treatment decisions – is essential for people with schizophrenia and for their families and/or caregivers as well.
WHO response
WHO’s Comprehensive Mental Health Action Plan 2013-2030 highlights the steps required to provide appropriate services for people with mental disorders including schizophrenia. A key recommendation of the Action Plan is to shift services from institutions to the community. The WHO Special Initiative for Mental Health aims to further progress towards objectives of the Comprehensive Mental Health Action Plan 2013-2030 by ensuring 100 million more people have access to quality and affordable care for mental health conditions.
WHO's Mental Health Gap Action Programme (mhGAP) uses evidence-based technical guidance, tools and training packages to expand service in countries, especially in resource-poor settings. It focuses on a prioritized set of conditions, including psychosis, directing capacity building towards non-specialized health-care providers in an integrated approach that promotes mental health at all levels of care. Currently mhGAP is being implemented in more than 100 WHO Member States.
The WHO QualityRights Project involves improving the quality of care and human rights conditions in mental health and social care facilities and to empower organizations to advocate for the health of people with mental health conditions and psychosocial disabilities.  
The WHO guidance on community mental health services and person-centred and rights-based approaches  provides information and support to all stakeholders who wish to develop or transform their mental health system and services to align with international human rights standards including the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
References
(1) Harrison G, Hopper K, Craig T, Laska E, Siegel C, Wanderling J. Recovery from psychotic illness: a 15- and 25-year international follow-up study. Br J Psychiatry 2001;178:506-17. 
(2) Institute of health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME). Global Health Data Exchange (GHDx).  http://ghdx.healthdata.org/gbd-results-tool?params=gbd-api-2019-permalink/27a7644e8ad28e739382d31e77589dd7 (Accessed 25 September 2021)
(3) Laursen TM, Nordentoft M, Mortensen PB. Excess early mortality in schizophrenia. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 2014;10, 425-438.
(4) WHO. Mental health systems in selected low- and middle-income countries: a WHO-AIMS cross-national analysis. WHO: Geneva, 2009
 (5) Jaeschke K et al. Global estimates of service coverage for severe mental disorders: findings from the WHO Mental Health Atlas 2017 Glob Ment Health 2021;8:e27.

Suicide 
Key facts
* More than 720 000 people die due to suicide every year.
* Suicide is the third leading cause of death among 15–29-year-olds.
* Seventy-three per cent of global suicides occur in low- and middle-income countries.
* The reasons for suicide are multi-faceted, influenced by social, cultural, biological, psychological, and environmental factors present across the life-course. 
* For every suicide there are many more people who attempt suicide. A prior suicide attempt is an important risk factor for suicide in the general population.

Overview
Every year 726 000 people take their own life and there are many more people who make suicide attempts. Every suicide is a tragedy that affects families, communities and entire countries and has long-lasting effects on the people left behind. Suicide occurs throughout the lifespan and was the third leading cause of death among 15–29-year-olds globally in 2021.
Suicide does not just occur in high-income countries but is a global phenomenon in all regions of the world. In fact, close to three quarters (73%) of global suicides occurred in low- and middle-income countries in 2021.
Suicide is a serious public health problem that requires a public health response. With timely, evidence-based and often low-cost interventions, suicides can be prevented. For national responses to be effective, a comprehensive multisectoral suicide prevention strategy is needed.
Who is at risk?
The link between suicide and mental disorders (in particular, depression and alcohol use disorders) and a previous suicide attempt is well established in high-income countries. However, many suicides happen impulsively in moments of crisis with a breakdown in the ability to deal with life stresses, such as financial problems, relationship disputes, or chronic pain and illness.
In addition, experiencing conflict, disaster, violence, abuse or loss and a sense of isolation are strongly associated with suicidal behaviour. Suicide rates are also high among vulnerable groups who experience discrimination, such as refugees and migrants; indigenous peoples; lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, intersex (LGBTI) persons; and prisoners.
Prevention and control
There are several measures that can be taken at population, sub-population and individual levels to prevent suicide and self-harm. LIVE LIFE, WHO’s initiative for suicide prevention, recommends the following key effective evidence-based interventions:
* limit access to the means of suicide (e.g. pesticides, firearms, certain medications);
* interact with the media for responsible reporting of suicide;
* foster socio-emotional life skills in adolescents; and
* early identify, assess, manage and follow up anyone who is affected by suicidal behaviours.
These need to go hand-in-hand with the following foundational pillars: situation analysis, multisectoral collaboration, awareness raising, capacity building, financing, surveillance and monitoring and evaluation.
Suicide prevention efforts require coordination and collaboration among multiple sectors of society, including the health sector and other sectors such as education, labour, agriculture, business, justice, law, defence, politics and the media. These efforts must be comprehensive and integrated given the multifaceted nature of suicide.
Challenges and obstacles
Stigma and taboo
Stigma, particularly surrounding mental disorders and suicide, means many people thinking of taking their own life or who have attempted suicide are not seeking help and are therefore not getting the help they need. The prevention of suicide has not been adequately addressed due to a lack of awareness of suicide as a major public health problem and the taboo in many societies to openly discuss it. To date, only a few countries have included suicide prevention among their health priorities and only 38 countries report having a national suicide prevention strategy.
Raising community awareness and breaking down the taboo is important for countries to make progress in preventing suicide.
Data quality
Globally, the availability and quality of data on suicide and self-harm is poor. Only some 80 WHO Member States have good-quality vital registration data that can be used directly to estimate suicide rates. This problem of poor-quality mortality data is not unique to suicide, but given the stigma surrounding suicide – and the illegality of suicidal behaviour in some countries – it is likely that under-reporting and misclassification are greater problems for suicide than for most other causes of death.
Improved surveillance and monitoring of suicide and self-harm are required for effective suicide prevention strategies. Cross-national differences in the patterns of suicide, and changes in the rates, characteristics and methods of suicide, highlight the need for each country to improve the comprehensiveness, quality and timeliness of their suicide-related data. This includes vital registration of suicide, hospital-based registries of self-harm and nationally representative surveys collecting information about self-reported self-harm.
WHO response
The urgency to act to prevent suicides has been recognized and prioritized at the highest levels. The reduction of the suicide rate is an indicator in the UN Sustainable Development Goals (the only indicator for mental health), WHO’s General Programme of Work and WHO’s Comprehensive Mental Health Action Plan 2013–2030. 
The first WHO world suicide report, Preventing suicide: a global imperative, published in 2014, aimed to increase the awareness of the public health significance of suicide and suicide attempts and to make suicide prevention a high priority on the global public health agenda. It also aimed to encourage and support countries to develop or strengthen comprehensive national suicide prevention strategies through a multisectoral public health approach.
In 2021, WHO launched LIVE LIFE: an implementation guide for suicide prevention in countries. Accompanying resources to support the implementation of the four key LIVE LIFE interventions have also been published including the 2024 brochure on Preventing suicide by phasing out highly hazardous pesticides to support limiting access to means, Preventing suicide: a resource for media professionals, update 2023 to encourage responsible reporting of suicide, and the Helping Adolescents Thrive toolkit to foster socio-emotional life-skills among young people. At the health sector level, suicide/self-harm is one of the priority conditions in the WHO Mental Health Gap Action Programme (mhGAP), which provides evidence-based technical guidance to scale up service provision and care in countries for mental, neurological and substance use disorders. The mhGAP Intervention Guide (?mhGAP-IG)? includes a specific module for suicide and self-harm to support early identification, assessment, management and follow-up. Through the LIVE LIFE initiative, governments are encouraged and supported to implement a suite of evidence-based interventions and foundational pillars for suicide prevention.

Mental health: Promoting and protecting human rights
6 October 2023 | Q&A 
What does ‘everyone has the right to mental health’ mean? 
Mental health is a basic human right for all people. 
Everyone, whoever and wherever they are, has a deserving and inherent right to the highest attainable standard of mental health. 
This includes: 
* the right to available, accessible, acceptable and good quality care; and 
* the right to liberty, independence and inclusion in the community. 
Having a mental health condition should never be a reason to deprive a person of their human rights or to exclude them from decisions about their own health.
Unfortunately, people with mental health conditions around the world experience a wide range of human rights violations.  Many experience coercive practices including involuntary admission and treatment as well as seclusion and restraint. It is also common for people to be excluded from community life, discriminated against, denied basic rights such as food and shelter, and prohibited from voting or getting married.
Many more cannot access the mental health care they need or can only access care that violates their human rights. In many places, lack of community based services means that the main setting for mental health care is long-stay psychiatric hospitals or institutions, which are often associated with human rights violations.
How can the human rights of people with mental health conditions be promoted? How can human rights violations be prevented? 
* By ensuring laws and policies related to mental health are in line with internationally agreed human rights conventions. Countries should ensure their policies and laws related to mental health both protect and promote mental health. While many countries have sought to reform their laws, policies and services since the adoption of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in 2006, too few have adopted or amended the relevant laws and policies on the scale needed to end violations and promote the human right to mental health. 
* Improve human rights in mental health services. Ways to assess and improve quality of care and human rights conditions should be established to protect against inhuman and degrading treatment, poor living conditions and involuntary admission and treatment. People should be able to file complaints in cases of human rights violations.
* Replace psychiatric institutions with community care. Large institutions, which are often associated with human rights violations, should be replaced by community mental health services, backed by care in general hospital and home care support. Mental health services need to link to services and supports in the community, enabling people living with mental health conditions to access educational, employment, social service and housing opportunities on an equal basis with others.
* Change attitudes and raise awareness. Ministries of Health, health professionals, civil society (in particular people with lived experience, organizations of persons with disabilities, and NGOs), academic institutions, professional organizations and other stakeholders should unify their efforts in educating and advocating for the rights of people with mental health conditions.
* Empower people with mental health conditions and their families. Governments should support creating and/or strengthening organizations of people with mental health conditions and as well as family organizations. These groups are in the best position to highlight problems, specify their needs, and help find solutions to prevent violations and improving mental health and other support services in countries. They have a crucial role to play in the design and implementation of policies, plans, laws and services.
* Increase investment in mental health. Governments need to dedicate more of their health budget to mental health. In addition, the mental health workforce at each level of the health care system needs to be developed and trained to ensure that all people have access to good quality mental health services that promote recovery and respect for human rights.
How can I find out more about mental health and human rights? Where can I learn how to support my own mental health and the mental health of others? 
The QualityRights e-training is a free online course, developed by WHO, which is designed to help you:
* understand and improve your own mental health
* learn how to support friends, family and others with their mental health 
* gain the knowledge and skills to tackle stigma, discrimination and coercive practices 
* learn how to provide support to someone experiencing a crisis.
It is available in 11 languages. Find out more here. 
The QualityRights initiative aims to support countries to assess and improve the quality of care in mental health and related services and to promote the rights of people with psychosocial, intellectual and cognitive disabilities. 

mental health and stress:

Mental health is an integral part of our overall well-being, encompassing our emotional, psychological, and social functioning. It affects how we think, feel, and behave in daily life, influencing everything from decision-making and relationships to handling stress and navigating challenges. Stress, a common mental health concern, arises when we feel overwhelmed or unable to cope with external pressures. While some stress can be motivating, chronic stress often leads to physical and emotional exhaustion, manifesting in symptoms such as irritability, fatigue, and difficulty concentrating. Prolonged stress has been linked to serious health issues, including heart disease, hypertension, depression, and anxiety disorders. Mental health challenges, including stress, often remain unaddressed due to stigma and lack of awareness, preventing many from seeking necessary help. Promoting mental health requires a multi-faceted approach, including open dialogue, education, and accessible resources. Engaging in self-care practices such as regular exercise, a balanced diet, adequate sleep, and mindfulness can significantly alleviate stress and enhance resilience. Moreover, fostering supportive relationships and seeking professional guidance when needed are crucial steps toward maintaining mental health. Societal attitudes must shift to prioritize mental well-being, treating it with the same urgency as physical health. Understanding that mental health is not just the absence of mental disorders but a state of overall psychological harmony can empower individuals and communities to lead healthier, more fulfilling lives. Addressing stress and mental health challenges at both individual and systemic levels is essential for building a compassionate, well-balanced society where people can thrive and reach their full potentia
IMPORTANCE OF DOCUMENTATION IN
MENTAL HEALTH
Clinical documentation is the process of recording details about a patient and his
illness from the time of attending to his problem to his progress of discharge.
There’s an old saying: ‘If it isn’t written, it doesn’t exist.’ This saying points to
the need for clear, consistent documentation of events to ensure that a patient’s
history is clearly documented, with the treatment plan, the services provided and
the clinical changes that have taken place in the course of treatment.
Documentation should be made in simple and easy to understand language.
Documentation should be for the long-term use. Without documentation, one
35
Documentation in Mental
Health and Mental Disorder
Field
cannot find a pattern. It is important to ensure that documentation and record
keeping is not overlooked due to focus on providing direct patient care.
Documentation and record keeping are crucial in order to maintain accountability
and facilitate coordination to improve services provided to the patients.
As such, proper documentation and record keeping may be neglected. The
following section provides three reasons why it is important to document and
maintain proper records.
Continuity of Care
Records provide a case history, information taken from various sources such as
family members and previous records, regarding illness, socio-demographic
profile and illness history. This is especially important for patients with psychiatric
illnesses who require long-term management or have complex needs, or who
require a holistic approach. Accurate and up-to-date recording is important
especially when there is an emergency and the staff-in-charge is not available
(due to illness, vacation, resignation, etc.). Good records and documentation
will facilitate communication between practitioners to ensure coordinated, rather
than fragmented service, and to be able to provide relevant patient information
at any given time. Information may also be needed to revisit the information
regarding course of illness, past history, treatment history, response to medication
and any other valuable information. Documentation forms the nature of the
professional relationship with the patient.
Better Patient Care and Better Service Delivery
Well-documented records can also lead to improved patient care, better long
term management; make management plans and addition of notes for precautions.
Aggregated patient information can also facilitate service planning, development
of standard care protocols. The information collected form primary data to conduct
evidence-based research. The information regarding the following becomes
mandatory in good documentation.
Patient Assessment
Record should clearly show the present history, past history, patient’s concerns/
history, medication history, physical examination findings.
Plan of Care : Record should show patients’ problems, planned interventions,
investigations ordered, consent given, treatment/medication ordered.
Patient Progress Notes : Should provide outline of updates on care plans, all
referrals/consultations, all results obtained, patients’ response to treatment and
if any side effects of drugs.
Patient Discharge Plan : Outline of instructions and information given to patient/
next of kin, discharge letters and prescriptions and need for follow-up.
This will help in patient assessment as well as assist in planning the treatment
plan.
3.3.1 Documentation Management and Accountability
Documentation management is defined as the process of accumulating and
classifying documents and making them available to others. Documentation
36
Future Direction management is bound to accuracy, motivation and responsibility shown by
individuals involved in the process of the document creation and further continuity
throughout a whole set of transitional states. Lack of those elements, radically
affects the way information flows are perceived, monitored and channeled within
an organizational structure.
Evaluation as a part of documentation management is an important aspect of any
organization because it allows you to reflect on what has taken place and think
about future planning.
Today, the world is so much flooded with documented knowledge that it requires
some system to be followed for locating the exact information at a time when it
is actually required. This work involves organization of information in such a
way as to make it available for a specific purpose in a readily usable form and in
the shortest possible time. The nature of such work varies in different types of
documentation recorded in the hospitals and is determined by the types and range
of Health Care Services.
There is no doubt that record keeping is an integral part of care. If a situation
arises where the health professional was responsible for the total delivery of care
and the case-load was of such a size that every detail relating to each patient
could be remembered in its entirety, then possibly there would be no need to
keep the records. In reality the situation is very different. Care should be shared
between a number of health professionals and the notes should provide an effective
means of communication between them. It helps in accountability. It could be
argued that if a health professional failed to record a significant event and thus
did not communicate with a colleague, who then proceeded to act in a way,
which was detrimental to the patient, this would constitute professional
misconduct.
In addition, in mental health field case-loads are of such a size that no health
professional could hope to remember all the detail from contact to contact, the
records, therefore become an important helping aid for the professional. Amidst
the demands and pressures of the busy working day it is all too easy to see the
facts from the available good records if available. In planning the day, the health
professional should allocate a time both for direct contact and for writing up
what has taken place. It is the two together which represent the total commitment
to the client. The notes are clearly a tool, which not only enables health
professionals to discharge their duty of care, but they also perform another
function, which is their evidential role. Long after the professional has finished
with them they may be required to respond to a complaint or for use at an enquiry/
tribunal or for the purposes of litigation. The difficulty here will be that while
the claimant will remember everything in great detail, the health professional
will remember little or nothing. It is important that records are kept accurately,
correctly filed and archived in accordance with good practice principles. Every
organization should have a record management and retention policy. All records
should be maintained and stored in a manner where they are easily retrieved.
This must be balanced with the need for confidentiality.
To conclude, it can be said that record keeping and documentation forms a sound
support system to fall back on and build up when needed.
What is Self-Harm?

For some people, when depression and anxiety lead to a tornado of emotions, they turn to self-harm looking for a release. Self-harm and self-injury are any forms of hurting oneself on purpose. Usually, when people self-harm, they do not do so as a suicide attempt. Rather, they self-harm as a way to release painful emotions.
Types of Self-Harm

Self-harm can manifest differently for everyone. And, the ways people may self-harm extend far beyond the usual references to cutting in media. Simply, self-harm is anything and everything someone can do to purposely hurt their body.

Here are some of the most common types of self-injury:

    Cutting
    Scratching
    Burning
    Carving words or symbols into the skin
    Hitting or punching oneself (including banging one’s head or other body parts against another surface)
    Piercing the skin with sharp objects such as hairpins
    Pulling out hair
    Picking at existing wounds

Symptoms of Self-Harm

Stigma creates shame and embarrassment, making it hard for people who self-harm to get help. So, look out for yourself and for your pals. If you suspect that someone in your life is self-harming, here are some warning signs to keep top of mind:

    Scars
    Fresh cuts, burns, scratches, or bruises
    Rubbing an area excessively to create a burn
    Having sharp objects on hand
    Wearing long sleeves or long pants, even in hot weather
    Difficulties with interpersonal relationships
    Persistent questions about personal identity
    Behavioral and emotional instability, impulsiveness, or unpredictability
    Saying that they feel helpless, hopeless, or worthless

Crisis Text Line can help you deal with self-harm. Text a Crisis Counselor at 741741, or use the mobile text button below.
How to Deal With Self-Harm

Emotions can be really painful sometimes. It’s totally normal to need ways to cope with and process the hard things in your life. If you are using self-harm to manage your emotions, we’re here for you. And, we want to help keep you safe.

Here are some ways to push through, process, and cope with your emotions.

    Text to cool down. If you’re dealing with painful emotions, we’re here to help. Shoot us a text to connect with a real human and strategize healthy coping mechanisms to manage your emotions. Text CONNECT to 741741 to connect with a real human.
    Get creative. Studies show that diving into making art can help people process emotions. So, next time you’re feeling like self-harming, grab your sharpie and doodle your worries away. A bonus: you can totally suck at it and still reap the same rewards.
    Find your zen. Keeping yourself safe from self-harming is all about finding healthy alternatives to work through the hard stuff. Researchers found taking time to re-center through meditation to be a powerful way to find your cool and calm. Try using an app like Headspace to get on the meditation bandwagon.
    Talk to a pro. Self-harm is serious. And, while the intention behind self-harm usually is not death, it can still be dangerous—both physically and emotionally. Talking to someone who can help you find alternatives is incredibly important. Of course, you can start by texting us. Also, consider telling someone you know who can help you connect with a professional.

Why Do People Self-Harm?

Let’s start with this: everyone needs a way to cope with their emotions. People who self-harm have turned to hurting themselves as their coping mechanism to manage their emotions.

So, people might self-harm to:

    Process their negative feelings
    Distract themselves from their negative feelings
    Feel something physical, particularly if they are feeling numb
    Develop a sense of control over their lives
    Punish themselves for things they think they’ve done wrong
    Express emotions that they are otherwise embarrassed to show

Effects of Self-Harm

Self-harm can be seriously dangerous—physically, emotionally, socially, all of it.

Physical Effects of Self-Harm

    Permanent scars
    Uncontrolled bleeding
    Infection
    Emotional Effects of Self-Harm
    Guilt or shame
    A diminished sense of self, including feeling helpless or worthless
    Addiction to the behavior

Social Effects of Self-Harm

    Avoiding friends and loved ones
    Becoming ostracized from loved ones who may not understand
    Interpersonal difficulty from lying to others about injuries

Recovering from Self-Harm

A lot of people who self-harm do so because they are dealing with painful emotions. If this applies to you, hi—we believe in you and recognize your pain. Because painful emotions are at the root of self-harm, quite often recovering from self-harm involves addressing emotions.

Breaking away from the cycle of self-harm can feel like a huge climb. It involves breaking a habit that has once brought comfort from pain. But, it is not impossible. Here are some steps to set you up for success:

    Name your reason for hurting yourself and your reason for quitting. Ask yourself: “What do I feel before, during, and after self-injury? Which of those emotions do I actively seek out, and which are harmful?”
    Identify other ways of achieving the same result. For example, if you self-harm for the physical sensation, seek other ways of releasing endorphins, like exercise. For real, try throwing a few punches at a kickboxing class or tapping it back in a spin class with the *perfect* playlist. If you self-harm to express your emotions, practice expressing them in words by writing them down. Grab a pen and your favorite notebook, or start typing away in your notes app.
    Tackle the underlying emotions. Explore the feelings that lead you to want to hurt yourself. If it’s guilt, where is that guilt coming from? Maybe try finding a therapist—there are pros trained specifically to help with this.
    Tell someone you trust. Let a friend, family member, or trusted adult know what you’re going through and that you need their support. Opening up to people can be easier said than done. Here’s a place to start: “I’m having a hard time processing some painful emotions and I could use your support right now.”

Getting healthy—both in your brain and in your body—takes hard work. You got this. And, we believe in you.
Mental health is about how people think, feel, and behave. Mental health care professionals can help people manage conditions such as depression, anxiety, bipolar disorder, addiction, and other disorders that affect their thoughts, feelings, and behaviors.

Mental health can affect a person’s day-to-day life, relationships, and physical health. External factors in people’s lives and relationships can also contribute to their mental well-being.

Looking after one’s mental health can help a person maintain their ability to enjoy life. This involves balancing their activities, responsibilities, and efforts to achieve psychological resilience.

Stress, depression, and anxiety can affect mental health and may disrupt a person’s routine.

Although healthcare professionals often use the term “mental health,” doctors recognize that many mental health conditions have physical roots.

This article explains what mental health and mental health conditions mean. It also describes the most common types of mental health disorders, including their early signs and how to treat them.
The WHO definition of mental health
Chelsea Victoria/Stocksy

According to the World Health Organization (WHO)Trusted Source:

    “Mental health is a state of mental well-being that enables people to cope with the stresses of life, realize their abilities, learn well and work well, and contribute to their community.” 

The WHO states that mental health is “more than the absence of mental disorders.” Peak mental health is about managing active conditions and maintaining wellness and happiness.

The organization also emphasizes that preserving and restoring mental health is important at individual, community, and societal levels.

In the United States, the National Alliance on Mental Illness estimates that almost 1 in 5 adults experience mental health problems each year.

In 2021, an estimated 14.1 million adultsTrusted Source in the U.S., about 5.5% of the adult population, had a serious psychological condition, according to the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH).
Risk factors for mental health conditions

Everyone is at some risk of developing a mental health disorder, regardless of age, sex, income, or ethnicity. In the U.S. and much of the developed world, depression is one of the leading causesTrusted Source of disability.

Social and financial circumstances, adverse childhood experiences, biological factors, and underlying medical conditions can allTrusted Source shape a person’s mental well-being.

Many people with a mental health disorder have more than oneTrusted Source condition at the same time.

It is important to note that mental well-being depends on a balance of factors, and several elements may contribute to the development of a mental health disorder.

The following factors can contribute to mental health conditions.
Socioeconomic pressure

Having limited financial means or belonging to a marginalized ethnic group can increase the risk of mental health disorders as a result of biases in healthcare.

A 2015 Iranian studyTrusted Source describes several socioeconomic causes of mental health conditions, including poverty and living on the outskirts of a large city.

The researchers also described flexible (modifiable) and inflexible (nonmodifiable) factors that can affect the availability and quality of mental health care treatment for certain groups.

Modifiable factors for mental health disorders include:

    socioeconomic conditions, such as whether work is available in a local area
    occupation
    a person’s level of social involvement
    education
    housing quality

Nonmodifiable factors include:

    gender
    age
    ethnicity
    nationality 

The researchers found that being female increased the risk of low mental health status by nearly four times. People with a “weak economic status” scored highest for mental health conditions in this study.
Childhood adversity

Several studiesTrusted Source report that childhood traumas such as child abuse, parental loss, parental separation, and parental illness significantly affect a growing child’s mental and physical health.

There are associations between childhood abuse and other adverse events and mental health disorders. These experiences also make people vulnerable to post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
Biological factors

The NIMH suggests that a person’s family history can increase the likelihoodTrusted Source of mental health conditions, as specific genes and gene variants put a person at higher risk. However, having a gene associated with a mental health disorder does not guarantee that a condition will develop.

Likewise, people without related genes or a family history of mental health conditions may have a mental health disorder.

Chronic stress and mental health disorders such as depression and anxiety may develop due to underlying physical health problems, such as cancer, diabetes, and chronic pain.
Mental health resources

Visit our dedicated hub for more research-backed information and resources on mental health and well-being.
Types of mental health disorders

Healthcare professionals group mental health disorders according to the features they have in common. They include:

    anxiety disorders
    mood disorders
    schizophrenia disorders

Anxiety disorders

According to the Anxiety and Depression Association of America, anxiety disorders are the most common mental health disorders.

People with these conditions have severe fear or anxiety related to certain objects or situations. Most people with an anxiety disorder try to avoid exposure to whatever triggers their anxiety.

Below are some examples of anxiety disorders.
Generalized anxiety disorder

Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) involves excessive worry or fear that disrupts everyday living.

People may also experience physical symptoms, including:

    restlessness
    fatigue
    poor concentration
    tense muscles
    interrupted sleep

Anxiety symptoms do not always have a specific trigger in people with GAD.

They may experience excessive anxiety when encountering everyday situations that do not pose a direct danger, such as chores or appointments. A person with GAD may sometimes feel anxiety with no trigger at all.
Panic disorder

People with panic disorder experience regular panic attacks involving sudden, overwhelming terror or a sense of imminent disaster and death.
Phobias

There are many types of phobias, and what may seem typical to one person might be a severe problem that dominates daily life for another. Different types include:

    Simple phobias: These may involve a disproportionate fear of specific objects, scenarios, or animals. A fear of spiders is a typical example.
    Social phobia: Sometimes known as social anxiety, this is a fear of being watched or judged by others. People with social phobia often restrict their exposure to social environments.
    Agoraphobia: The term “agoraphobia” refers to a fear of situations where getting away may be difficult, such as being in an elevator or a moving train. People sometimes misunderstand this phobia as a fear of being outside. 

Obsessive-compulsive disorder

People with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) may experience constant, stressful thoughts and an urge to perform repetitive acts, such as handwashing.
PTSD

PTSD can occur after a person experiences or witnesses a stressful or traumatic event. During this type of event, the person thinks their life or other people’s lives are in danger. They may feel afraid or that they have no control over what is happening.

These sensations of trauma and fear may then contribute to PTSD.
Mood disorders

People may also refer to mood disorders as affective disorders or depressive disorders.

People with these conditions have significant mood changes, generally involving either mania, a period of high energy and joy, or depression. Examples of mood disorders include:

    Major depression: An individual with major depression experiences a constant low mood and loses interest in activities and events that they previously enjoyed (anhedonia). They may feel prolonged periods of sadness or extreme sadness.
    Bipolar disorder: A person with bipolar disorder experiences unusual changesTrusted Source in their mood, energy levels, levels of activity, and ability to continue with daily life. Periods of high mood are known as manic phases, while depressive phases bring on low mood.
    Seasonal affective disorder (SAD): Reduced daylight during the fall, winter, and early spring months triggers SAD, a type of major depressionTrusted Source. It is most common in countries far from the equator.

Read more about the different types of bipolar disorder.
Schizophrenia disorders

The term “schizophrenia” often refers to a spectrum of disorders characterized by features of psychosis and other severe symptoms. These are highly complex conditions.

According to the NIMH, signs of schizophrenia typically develop between the ages of 16 and 30Trusted Source. A person will have thoughts that appear fragmented, and may also find it hard to process information.

Schizophrenia has negative and positive symptoms. Positive symptoms include delusions, thought disorders, and hallucinations, while withdrawal, lack of motivation, and a flat or inappropriate mood are examples of negative symptoms.
Early signs

No physical test or scan reliably indicates whether a person has developed a mental health condition. However, people should look out for the following as possible signs:

    withdrawing from friends, family, and colleagues
    avoiding activities they would usually enjoy
    sleeping too much or too little
    eating too much or too little
    feeling hopeless
    having consistently low energy
    using mood-altering substances, including alcohol and nicotine, more frequently
    displaying negative emotions
    being confused
    being unable to complete daily tasks, such as getting to work or cooking a meal
    having persistent thoughts or memories that reappear regularly
    thinking of causing physical harm to themselves or others
    hearing voices
    experiencing delusions

Diagnosis

Diagnosing a mental health disorder requires a multistep process. A doctor may begin by looking at a person’s medical history and performing a thorough physical exam to rule out a physical condition that may be causing the symptoms. They may also order laboratory tests, such as imaging exams and bloodwork, to screen for possible underlying causes.

The healthcare professional will also do a psychological evaluation. This includes asking about a person’s symptoms and experiences and how these affect the individual’s life. The doctor may ask a person to complete mental health questionnaires to help understand their thoughts, feelings, and behavior patterns.

Most mental health care professionals use the American Psychiatric Association’s (APA) Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th edition, text revision (DSM-5-TR) to make a diagnosis. The DSM-5-TR contains descriptions and specific criteria for a diagnosis.
Treatment

Various methods are available to help manage mental health conditions. Treatment is highly individual, and what works for one person may not work for another.

Some strategies or treatments are more successful in combination with others. A person with a mental health disorder may choose different options at various stages in their life.

It is important for an individual to work closely with a doctor who can help them identify their needs and provide suitable treatment.

Below are some treatment options for people with mental health conditions.
Psychotherapy, or talking therapies

The following types of therapyTrusted Source take a psychological approach to treating mental health:

    cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT)
    exposure therapy
    dialectical behavior therapy

Psychiatrists, psychologists, psychotherapists, and some primary care physicians carry out these treatments.

Therapy may help individuals to understand the cause of their mental health condition. Working with a healthcare professional may help people manage their day-to-day living and reduce any risk of isolation and self-harm.

Read more about psychotherapy.
Medication

Some peopleTrusted Source take prescribed medications, such as antidepressants, antipsychotics, and drugs for anxiety.

Although these medications cannot cure mental health disorders, some can help improve symptoms. They may also help a person to manage their social interactions and routines.

Some medications boost the body’s absorption of feel-good chemicals, such as serotonin, from the brain. Other drugs either boost the levels of these chemicals or help prevent their degradation or destruction.
Self-help

A person coping with a mental health condition may decide to make certain lifestyle changes to help them manage their well-being.

Changes may includeTrusted Source:

    reducing alcohol intake, if applicable
    trying to improve sleep quality
    eating a balanced, nutritious diet
    taking time away from work, if this is possible
    practicing relaxation techniques, such as deep breathing, meditation, and mindfulness

A support network, whether through self-help groups or close friends and family, can be helpful to a person’s well-being.
Myths vs. facts about mental health

There are several commonly held misconceptions about mental health. Here are some examples:
Myth	Fact
A person with a mental health condition has low intelligence.	Mental health disorders can affect anybody regardless of intelligence, income, or social status.
Teenagers do not have mental health issues. They have changes in their mood due to their fluctuating hormones.	While teenagers may often have mood changes, it does not mean they do not have mental health conditions. Half of all mental health conditions begin by the age of 14.
People with mental health conditions are dangerous, violent, and unpredictable.	Crimes committed by people with serious mental health disorders make up only 5% of all violent crimes.
Psychiatric medications are harmful.	Mental health conditions, like other health conditions, are real. A healthcare professional may prescribe medication to help people manage their symptoms and day-to-day life.
People with bipolar disorder are moody.	Bipolar disorder cycles can last from weeks to months and do not change quickly. However, changes in a person’s state of emotion may happen quickly.
A person with a mental health condition is weak. Such conditions would not affect strong people.	Having a mental health condition is not related to choice or willpower. Anyone can have a mental health condition.
Bad parenting causes adolescents to have mental health conditions.	Many adverse experiences and factors may influence a person’s mental health and well-being. Relationships with parents and guardians are just one factor. A person living in a supportive, loving home can experience similar mental health disorders to someone living in a home with caregivers who need support to provide a safe environment.
People with mental health needs cannot keep and perform well in a job.	People with mental health conditions can perform well at workTrusted Source, especially in a workplace that supports and promotes mental well-being.

Read more about mental health myths.
Help is out there

If you or someone you know is in crisis and considering suicide or self-harm, please seek support:

    Call or text the 988 Lifeline at 988 or chat at 988lifeline.org. Caring counselors are available to listen and provide free and confidential support 24/7.
    Text HOME to the Crisis Text Line at 741741 to connect with a volunteer crisis counselor for free and confidential support 24/7.
    Not in the United States? Find a helpline in your country with Befrienders Worldwide.
    Call 911 or your local emergency services number if you feel safe to do so.

If you’re calling on behalf of someone else, stay with them until help arrives. You may remove weapons or substances that can cause harm if you can do so safely.

If you’re not in the same household, stay on the phone with them until help arrives.
Outlook

While mental health disorders are common, they vary in severity. Many people can manage their symptoms and lead full lives with treatment and access to support.

For others, recovery may include learning new ways to help manage their lives.

The prevalence of mental health disorders tends to peak in people ages 18–25Trusted Source but drops significantly among people ages 50 and over.

Having a mental health condition, especially depression, is associated withTrusted Source severe chronic health conditions such as diabetes, stroke, cardiovascular disease, and Alzheimer’s disease.
Steps to help maintain mental well-being

According to the NIMHTrusted Source, the following steps can help a person manage their mental health by reducing their risk of illness, increasing energy levels, and controlling stress:

    Regular exercise: Exercising for 45 minutes three to five times a week can help improveTrusted Source a person’s mental health.
    Eat a balanced diet and stay hydrated: This can help a person maintain a constant supply of energy throughout the day.
    Aim for good-quality sleep: A 2021 review found that significant improvements in sleep quality led to greater improvements in mental health.
    Perform relaxing activities: Breathing exercises, meditation, wellness apps, and journaling can help reduce stress and improve overall health and well-being.
    Practice mindfulness and gratitude: A person can identify and note things they are grateful for at the end of each day.
    Look for positive social interactions: Connecting with people and maintaining meaningful relationships can help reduce stress and be a source of support and practical help in times of need.

Summary

The term “mental health” refers to a person’s cognitive, behavioral, and emotional well-being. It affects how people react to stressors, engage with others, and make choices.

According to the WHO, peak mental health is more than the absence of mental health problems. It is the ability to manage existing conditions and stressors while maintaining ongoing wellness and happiness.

Factors such as stress, depression, and anxiety can negatively affect a person’s mental health and disrupt their routine.

A healthcare professional may help someone with a mental health condition to manage their well-being through a program of therapy or medications.

Men’s mental health is an important yet often overlooked health concern. Mental health can affect males differently than females.

Both men and women experience mental health difficulties. However, there are some notable differences between the issues affecting them and the factors that influence those issues.

Keep reading to learn more about the most common issues and conditions affecting men’s mental health, including potential treatments and ways to help others experiencing mental health problems.
How mental health issues affect men differently
Seeking help is a crucial first step in recovering from any mental health condition.

Mental health issues affect men and women differently in the following ways:
Differences in condition prevalence and suicide rates

Women are more likelyTrusted Source to experience mental health conditions than men. They are also more likelyTrusted Source to attempt suicide.

However, men are more than 3.5 times more likely to die from suicide than women. This may be because they tend to choose more lethal weapons, such as firearms.
Different influencing factors

Men’s issues can develop from different causes and triggers than those that affect women.

For example, men’s issues often stem from societal expectations and traditional gender roles, which may lead men to think that they must:

    be the breadwinners in the family
    display traditional “masculine” traits, such as strength and control
    rely on oneself and not seek help from others
    not speak openly about their emotions

Holding on to these traditional beliefs can negatively impact men’s mental health and keep them from accessing support and treatment.
Differences in seeking help

Men are far less likelyTrusted Source than women to seek treatment for issues such as depression, substance abuse, and stressful life events. According to Mental Health America, this is due to:

    social “norms”
    a reluctance to talk
    downplaying their symptoms

A National Health Interview Survey reports that just 1 in 3 men took medication for daily feelings of depression or anxiety, while just 1 in 4 spoke to a mental health professional.
Men’s health resources

For more research-backed information and resources, visit our dedicated men’s health hub.
Warning signs

The signs and symptomsTrusted Source of a mental health condition will depend on the type, but there are some symptoms that people can look out for. These include:

    aggressiveness, anger, and irritability
    changes in mood or energy levels
    changes in appetite or sleeping habits
    difficulty focusing
    feeling restless or “on edge”
    a high consumption of alcohol
    inappropriate use of drugs
    participating in risky activities
    feeling sad, hopeless, numb, or emotionally “flat”
    having aches, pains, or other physical symptoms without a clear cause
    obsessive or compulsive thoughts or behaviors
    thinking or acting in a way that causes concern to others or has a negative impact on work, social, or family life
    thinking about or attempting suicide

If a person notices these symptoms in themselves or if a loved one spots them, it is a good idea to seek medical help.

Treating mental health issues in the early stages can often prevent the symptoms from becoming more severe and lower the risk of complications.
Who is at risk?

Several factors increase the risk of mental health conditions and suicide among men. The following groups may be more at risk than others:

    Older, white men: White men aged 85 years and older are most at risk of suicide. More men in this demographic die by suicide every year than in any other group by age, sex, or race.
    Men who have experienced trauma: Traumatic events, such as engaging in combat or being the victim of an assault, increase the risk of experiencing post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
    Men experiencing employment issues: Working in poor conditions or having a high workload can increase the risk of mental health issues. Unemployment and retirement also increase the riskTrusted Source of depression and suicide.
    Men who have had a marital breakdown: Depression is more common, and more severe, among men who are divorced. One studyTrusted Source suggests that being single is a significant suicide trigger among men.
    Men with legal or financial concerns: Having legal or financial worries can trigger the development of mental health problems and increase the risk of suicide.
    Men who misuse alcohol or drugs: Men are more likelyTrusted Source to engage in illicit drug use and alcohol use, which can trigger or exacerbate mental health conditions.
    Men with a family history of mental health issues: Many psychiatric conditions — including bipolar disorder, depression, and schizophrenia — run in familiesTrusted Source, suggesting a genetic component.
    Men dealing with other life challenges: Other risk factorsTrusted Source for mental health problems and suicide include physical illness or discomfort, conflict with family or friends, and the illness or death of a family member.

Common mental health conditions in men

Some of the most prevalent mental health conditions among men are:
Depression

Depression is characterized by a persistent low mood that interferes with everyday functioning. Worldwide, it is one of the most common mental health conditions.

Depression is almost twice as commonTrusted Source in women as men. However, men are far less likelyTrusted Source than women to seek treatment for it.

Learn about some of the hidden symptoms of depression here.

Learn about the typical symptoms of depression in men here.
Anxiety disorders

Anxiety disorders are characterized by intense and uncontrollable feelings of fear and worry.

The most common type, generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), often co-occurs with depression. Although women are twice as likely to experience GAD, men are less likely to seek treatment for it.

Other types of anxiety disorders, such as social anxiety disorder and obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), are equally common among men and women.

Social anxiety disorder causes intense anxiety and fear in social situations, while OCD causes the continuous repetition of specific thoughts (obsessions) or a compulsive need to perform specific routines repeatedly (compulsions).
Schizophrenia

Schizophrenia is a severe mental health condition wherein people do not interpret reality as it is. They experience hallucinations, delusions, and other forms of disordered thinking.

Schizophrenia can have a significant impact on quality of life and relationships. Of those who receive a schizophrenia diagnosis by the age of 30 years, 90% are men.
PTSD

PTSD is a condition characterized by symptoms of reliving a traumatic experience, avoidance, and hyperarousal.

Research indicates that around 60% of men experience at least one traumatic event in their lifetime, while 50% of women do. Types of trauma differ, with men being more likely to experience:

    accidents
    assaults
    combat
    natural disasters
    witnessing a death or injury

Women are more likely to experience sexual assault or child sexual abuse.

Although men have a higher risk of traumatic events, women are more likely to develop PTSD.
Substance abuse

Across most age groups, men have higher ratesTrusted Source of use or dependence on illegal drugs and alcohol than women. They are also more likely to require an emergency department visit and die from overdose.

According to the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and AlcoholismTrusted Source, 68,000 men die annually from alcohol-related causes, compared with 27,000 women.

Learn more about addiction here.
Treatment

Although many men are reluctant to seek and continueTrusted Source treatment for mental health issues, it is a vital step in recovery. With effective treatment, people can learn to manage their symptoms and begin to feel better.

Some treatment options include:
Psychotherapy

Therapy can help people work through issues that have triggered mental health conditions. It can also help individuals manage their symptoms, change their negative thoughts and unhelpful behaviors, and learn new coping skills.

There are many different styles of therapy. In order for it to be effective, it is essential that people find the right therapist and type of therapy for them.
Medication

A doctor may prescribe medication to treat various mental health conditions or symptoms associated with those illnesses.

For example, they may prescribe:

    antidepressants
    antianxiety medications
    antipsychotic drugs
    sleep aids

Typically, doctors will recommend that people use medications in combination with psychotherapy.
Lifestyle changes

Making positive lifestyle changes can make a significant contribution to mental well-being.

For example, it is important to:

    Eat a balanced diet.
    Get enough sleep.
    Exercise on most days.
    Manage stress through meditation or yoga, or in other ways.
    Limit or avoid the use of alcohol and drugs.

Learn more about some natural ways to ease conditions such as anxiety here.
Peer support

Attending a support group or group counseling can be very helpful for those with a mental health condition.
Prevention

There is no sure way to prevent mental health conditions. However, the following steps may reduce the risk of developing one:

    Communicate with family and friends, especially during stressful periods.
    Seek treatment promptly if any symptoms of poor mental health develop.
    Continue with maintenance treatment to prevent relapses of depression or other mental health conditions.
    Learn to manage stress through meditation, mindfulness, creative outlets, or other methods.
    Practice positive lifestyle choices, such as eating well, sleeping enough, and exercising.
    See a therapist for issues such as low self-esteem or childhood trauma, which could trigger mental health problems later in life.

How to help

There are several things a person can do to help a loved one with mental health issues. For example:

    Look for changes in the person’s behavior and mood. These may indicate the development of a mental health issue.
    Talk to the person and ask them how they are feeling. This is especially important if they have just experienced an upsetting event, such as divorce, bereavement, or retirement.
    Encourage them to talk to their doctor or a mental health professional.
    Offer to look up treatment providers, make an appointment for them, or attend the treatment with them.
    Check in with them regularly to see how they are.
    If someone is at risk of suicide, do not leave them alone. Call 911 and wait with them until help arrives.

Having the support of loved ones can have a significant impact on a person’s recovery. Some researchTrusted Source even suggests that some people who have suicidal thoughts but do not act on them choose not to do so because of the support of their friends and family.
Helpful organizations

Organizations that may be helpful for men with mental health conditions include:

    the National Alliance on Mental Illness, which is available at 800-950-NAMI (800-950-6264) or by free text for those in crisis (text “NAMI” to 741-741)
    the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline, which is available 24/7 at 800-273-TALK (800-273-8255)
    the Face It Foundation, which provides support groups, peer support, and other resources for men with depression
    HeadsUpGuys, which is an organization that provides strategies to manage or prevent depression in men
    the Movember Foundation, which is a charity that focuses on issues that affect men’s physical and mental health

Help is out there

If you or someone you know is in crisis and considering suicide or self-harm, please seek support:

    Call or text the 988 Lifeline at 988 or chat at 988lifeline.org. Caring counselors are available to listen and provide free and confidential support 24/7.
    Text HOME to the Crisis Text Line at 741741 to connect with a volunteer crisis counselor for free and confidential support 24/7.
    Not in the United States? Find a helpline in your country with Befrienders Worldwide.
    Call 911 or your local emergency services number if you feel safe to do so.

If you’re calling on behalf of someone else, stay with them until help arrives. You may remove weapons or substances that can cause harm if you can do so safely.

If you’re not in the same household, stay on the phone with them until help arrives.
Summary

Men’s mental health issues differ from women’s in many ways, yet they are just as important. One concerning aspect is that men are more reluctant to seek treatment for issues they face. The risk of suicide is also much higher among men.

However, seeking and continuing treatment can have a significant positive impact on the lives of men who experience mental health difficulties. Seeking support from health professionals and loved ones can ease the symptoms, improve quality of life, and reduce the risk of suicide.

Many organizations offer support to those experiencing mental health challenges, and many focus solely on providing information and help to men.

Social media use can lead to low quality sleep and harm mental health. It has associations with depression, anxiety, and low self-esteem.

Many people in today’s world live with their smartphones as virtual companions. These devices use electronic social media networks that alert users to updates on friends, favorite celebrities, and global events. Social media has become firmly integrated into a lot of people’s daily lives. According to the Pew Research Center, 72% of people in the United States now use social media.

At its core, social media is a powerful communication tool that has changed how individuals interact with one another. It speeds up how people exchange and share information, thoughts, and ideas across virtual networks. However, social media does have downsides. Some evidence suggests that its use — in particular, its overuse — can negatively affect mental health in numerous ways.

Keep reading to learn more about the links between social media and mental health, including the positive and negative effects that this tool can have on individuals.
Why social media affects mental health
Dion Ange/EyeEm/Getty Images

Social media has associations with depression, anxiety, and feelings of isolation, particularly among heavy users.

A 2015 Common Sense survey found that teenagers may spend as much as 9 hours of each day online. Many of these individuals are themselves concerned that they spend too much time browsing social networks. This wave of concern suggests that social media could affect the mental health of its users.

The researchers behind a 2017 Canadian study confirmed this finding. They noted that students who use social media for more than 2 hours daily are considerably more likely to rate their mental health as fair or poor than occasional users.

A 2019 studyTrusted Source tied social media use to disrupted and delayed sleep. Regular, high quality sleep is essential for well-being, and evidence shows that sleeping problems contribute to adverse mental health effects, such as depression and memory loss.

Aside from the adverse effects on sleep, social media may trigger mental health struggles by exposing individuals to cyberbullying. In a 2020 survey of more than 6,000 individuals aged 10–18 years, researchers found that about half of them had experienced cyberbullying.

One of the downsides of social media platforms is that they give individuals the opportunity to start or spread harmful rumors and use abusive words that can leave people with lasting emotional scars.
Statistics

Social media has come under a lot of criticism, with many reports connecting its use with severe consequences.

National surveys and population-based studies show that the world of social media can have devastating effects on users’ mental health. In the U.S. alone, survey findings show a 25% increase in suicide attempts among teenagers between 2009 and 2017.

Although social media may not play a role in each of these incidences, the time frame correlates with the growing use of these platforms. A 2021 study confirms this effect. The researchers reported that while social media use had a minimal impact on boys’ risk of suicide, girls who used social media for at least 2 hours each day from the age of 13 years had a higher clinical risk of suicide as adults.

Furthermore, findings from a population-based study show a decline in mental health in the U.S., with a 37% increase in the likelihood of major depressive episodes among adolescents.

A 2019 studyTrusted Source suggested that teenagers who use social media for more than 3 hours daily are more likely to experience mental health problems, such as depression, anxiety, aggression, and antisocial behavior.
Help is out there

If you or someone you know is in crisis and considering suicide or self-harm, please seek support:

    Call or text the 988 Lifeline at 988 or chat at 988lifeline.org. Caring counselors are available to listen and provide free and confidential support 24/7.
    Text HOME to the Crisis Text Line at 741741 to connect with a volunteer crisis counselor for free and confidential support 24/7.
    Not in the United States? Find a helpline in your country with Befrienders Worldwide.
    Call 911 or your local emergency services number if you feel safe to do so.

If you’re calling on behalf of someone else, stay with them until help arrives. You may remove weapons or substances that can cause harm if you can do so safely.

If you’re not in the same household, stay on the phone with them until help arrives.
Negative effects on health

Social media may trigger feelings of inadequacy. People may feel as though their life or appearance does not compare favorably with that of others on social media, leading to feelings of envy and dissatisfaction.

A 2018 study found that high social media usage increases rather than decreases feelings of loneliness. It also reported that reducing social media use helps people feel less lonely and isolated and improves their well-being.

Additionally, social media can facilitate cyberbullying and create unhealthy self-centeredness and distance from friends and family.
Positive effects

Despite its drawbacks, social media remains an efficient means of connecting communities and individuals across the world.

Social media-based networking among small groups of people is beneficial for many. Through social media, youngsters who struggle with social skills and anxiety can express themselves and socialize. It can be particularly advantageous for marginalized groups, such as LGBTQIA+ communities, as it enables people to meet and interact with other like-minded individuals.

Social media also serves as a platform that gives a voice to the voiceless. For example, people who have been subject to violence and abuse can use communities such as the #MeToo community to air their views, talk about what they are facing, and find support.

Social media can also educate and inform and provide an outlet for creativity and self-expression.
Linked conditions

Unregulated social media leads to a constant fear of missing out, which many refer to as FOMO. People may feel as though others are having more fun than them, which can affect self-esteem and cause mental health issues.

Individuals may compulsively check their phones at the cost of missing sleep or choose social media over in-person relationships or meetups.

Additionally, prioritizing social media networking over physical and social interactions increases the chances of mood disorders such as anxiety and depression.
Managing the effects

An individual can make their use of social media positive by:

    turning off a smartphone’s data connectivity at certain times of the day, such as while driving, at work, or in meetings
    turning off data connectivity while spending time with friends and family
    leaving the smartphone out of reach while sleeping
    turning off notifications to make it easier to resist the distracting beeps or vibrations
    limiting social media use to a computer rather than a smartphone

Preventing negative effects

People can help themselves avoid some of the adverse effects of social media by limiting use to 30 minutes a day, in turn reducing FOMO and the associated negative consequences.

By being more conscious of the amount of time they spend on social media, a person may notice improvements in their general mood, focus, and overall mental health.
Summary

Social media provides users with a rapid means of electronic communication and content sharing.

Although it has various positive effects, it can negatively affect users’ mental health.

Limiting the use of social media to 30 minutes a day can reduce FOMO and, in turn, relieve the loneliness, anxiety, depression, and sleep problems associated with excessive social media use.


Researchers have increasingly been studying the effects of diet and nutrition on mental health.

Many of them have noticed that people who follow a standard Western diet, which includes highly processed foods and added sugars, have higher risks of developing anxiety and depression.

Although the majority of the research to date has focused on the benefits of the Mediterranean diet, other dietary patterns may also have a positive effect on mental health.

In this article, we review some of the evidence suggesting that a healthful diet can improve mental health and help treat or prevent certain conditions. We also explore how food affects our mood.
Can diet help with mental health?
Changes to a person’s diet may improve their mental health.

Nutritional psychiatry, which some refer to as psychonutrition, is a new field of study that focuses on the effect of diet on mental health.

Most studies have focused on the effects of the standard Western diet and the Mediterranean diet. An article in the Proceedings of the Nutrition Society reviewed the existing body of research on diet, nutrition, and mental health.

The research suggests that the more closely a person follows a Western diet, with its highly processed foods, the more at risk they are for depression and anxiety. People who follow a Mediterranean diet, on the other hand, seem to be less likely to have mental health conditions.

Researchers from the Institute of Psychiatry at the King’s College in London in the United Kingdom investigated exactly how nutrition might affect mental health. They focused their researchTrusted Source on the effects of diet on the hippocampus.

The hippocampus is an area of the brain that generates new neurons in a process called neurogenesis. Research has linked neurogenesis in the hippocampus to a person’s mood and cognition.

Stressful experiences reduce neurogenesis in the hippocampus, while antidepressant drugs appear to promote this process.

Factors that can negatively affect neurogenesis in adults include:

    aging
    oxidative stress
    high fat diets
    high sugar diets
    alcohol
    opioids

Healthful foods and habits appear to promote neurogenesis. These include:

    diets that include polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), curcumin, and polyphenols
    a diet that meets calorie needs without a person overeating or undereating
    physical exercise
    learning

Nutrition resources

For more science-backed resources on nutrition, visit our dedicated hub.
Best diets

There is no specific diet that is best for mental health, but some eating patterns appear to be better than others.
Mediterranean diet

Among common diet plans, the Mediterranean diet has the strongest evidenceTrusted Source supporting its ability to reduce the symptoms of depression. It is also a diet that experts routinely recommendTrusted Source for overall health and well-being.

Compounds in the Mediterranean diet that have links to lower depression rates include:

    omega-3 fatty acids
    vitamin D
    methylfolate
    s-adenosylmethionine

The Mediterranean diet consistsTrusted Source of:

    plenty of fruits and vegetables
    whole grains
    potatoes
    cereals
    beans and pulses
    nuts and seeds
    olive oil
    low-to-moderate amounts of dairy products, fish, and poultry
    very little red meat
    eggs up to four times a week
    low-to-moderate amounts of wine

Learn more about how to eat a Mediterranean diet in this article.
Low calorie diet

Short-term calorie restriction has shown some promise for treating the symptoms of depression.

Experts have definedTrusted Source calorie restriction as “a reduction in energy intake well below the amount of calories that would be consumed ad libitum.” The extent of the restriction will vary depending on the individual’s needs.

One study that looked at the relationship between food intake and depression defined calorie restriction as a 30–40% decrease in calorie intake while retaining protein, vitamin, mineral, and water intake to maintain proper nutrition. According to this definition, a person who usually eats 2,000 calories per day would eat between 1,200 and 1,400 calories instead.

A person may not need to reduce their calorie intake by this much, however. ResearchersTrusted Source also noted that in an earlier study, otherwise healthy people who reduced their calorie intake by 25% for 6 months also had reduced depressive symptoms.

It is vital to note that calorie restriction can sometimes lead to the development of an eating disorder. It is also not safe for people who have an existing eating disorder or behaviors relating to disordered eating.

Anyone who wishes to try calorie restriction should also speak to a doctor or a registered dietitian about how to ensure that they are getting enough nutrients.

It is also important not to restrict calories or follow a low calorie diet in the long term, as this can damage neurons and make depressive symptoms worseTrusted Source.
Intermittent fasting

There is some evidence that intermittent fasting can help improve mood and mental well-being.

Clinicians have noted that fasting could contribute to improvements in mood, as well as people’s subjective sense of well-being, alertness, tranquility, and, in some cases, euphoria.

A small 2013 studyTrusted Source involving men over the age of 50 years found that in comparison with a control group, those who participated in intermittent fasting had significant decreases in:

    anger
    tension
    confusion
    mood disturbances

However, other research has produced contradictory results. A studyTrusted Source in amateur weightlifters found that 48 hours of fasting caused negative mood changes, including significantly increased anger and slightly raised confusion and fatigue.

As with calorie restriction, intermittent fasting is not safe for everyone. People with a history of eating disorders or blood sugar issues, such as hypoglycemia, should not attempt intermittent fasting without a doctor’s guidance.

Learn more about the potential benefits of intermittent fasting in this article.
Polyphenols

Another study showed an association between polyphenols and both the prevention of depression and the improvement of depressive symptoms. The polyphenols that the researchers studied came from:

    coffee
    tea
    citrus
    nuts
    soy
    grapes
    legumes
    spices

Foods or diets to avoid

Several studies have shown that people who follow a Western diet comprising highly processed foods are more likely to have major depression or persistent mild depression.

A 2010 studyTrusted Source showed that women who ate unhealthful Western-style diets had more psychological symptoms. The foods that these participants were eating included:

    processed foods
    fried foods
    refined grains, such as white bread
    sugary products
    beer

Similar unhealthful dietary patterns that typically lead to obesity, diabetes, and other physical health problems can also contribute to poor mental health.
Summary

Researchers are still determining how diet affects mood.

A Mediterranean diet is one healthful diet that can positively affect a person’s weight, blood pressure, cholesterol, and other measures of health. Calorie restriction and fasting may also affect a person’s mental health.

While a healthful diet may aid treatment for poor mental health, anyone experiencing the symptoms of a mental health condition, such as depression or anxiety, should speak to a doctor.

Self-care can range from physical activities like taking a warm bath, to social activities like catching up with friends, to mental activities like taking a break.

Self-care involves conscious participation in activities that promote healthy functioning and enhance a person’s well-being and quality of life. It helps reduce stress, boost self-confidence, and improve overall happiness.

The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)Trusted Source states that self-care means taking time to do things that improve both physical and mental health in order to live well.

This article explores what self-care is and includes examples. It also discusses the importance of self-care, common barriers, and how a person can build a self-care action plan.
What is self-care? 
Nuria Seguí/Stocksy

While self-care can mean different things for different people, it is a broad term that covers what a person does or engages in to improve or preserve their physical and mental well-being.

The World Health Organization (WHO)Trusted Source defines self-care as “the ability of individuals, families, and communities to promote health, prevent disease, maintain health, and cope with illness and disability with or without the support of a healthcare provider.”

Most people already practice self-care to stay healthy. This includes eating healthy foods, taking medicines, and doing physical activities.

About 6.7% of the U.S. population practice a form of health self-care on a daily basis. A 2020 survey also found that 7 in 10 Americans are aware of their need for self-care.
Self-care examples

Below are different self-care examples broken down into other areas of self-care.
Physical health

Self-care includes activities that make a person feel physically well and helps maintain their physical health.

A 2016 study on self-care practices of college students found that practices like sleep hygiene and food habits are positively associated with student engagement, persistence, and performance.

Examples of this include:

    getting enough sleep
    eating healthy food
    going for a walk
    drinking plenty of water
    practicing good personal hygiene
    taking a relaxing bath

Learn more about the benefits of exercise for physical and mental health.
Mental health

Self-care for mental health encompasses everything a person does to keep a healthy relationship with their mind. These include activities that keep the mind focused and engaged, like brain-stimulating activities.

According to NIMHTrusted Source, self-care can have several benefits to a person’s mental health. These include:

    lowering the risk of illness
    boosting energy levels
    reducing stress

Examples of mental self-care activities include:

    getting regular exercise
    reading a book
    learning a new hobby or skill
    listening to a podcast
    doing a digital detox
    practicing mindfulness

Emotional self-care

A person needs to learn how to acknowledge and regulate emotions as they arise and healthily process them. Emotional self-care can help individuals navigate their feelings, increase empathy, and learn coping mechanisms to deal with difficult emotions.

Some examples of emotional self-care are:

    journaling
    meditating
    practicing self-compassion and gratitude
    listening to music
    being aware of one’s boundaries and implementing them

Learn more about how to set boundaries.
Spiritual self-care

Spiritual self-care involves activities that center on spirituality and activities that nurture the soul. These include:

    engaging in prayer and meditation
    attending a worship service
    doing yoga
    self-reflection
    reflection
    walking in nature
    attending a retreat

A 2019 review found that yoga and mind-body meditation reduced stress and burnout among healthcare workers, as well as improved their quality of sleep.
Social life self-care

Humans are social beings who need regular interaction. Social relationships are beneficial for a person’s health and well-being while being isolated can negatively affect a person’s mental, emotional, and physical health.

A 2018 studyTrusted Source found that loneliness and lower perceived social support are associated with poorer outcomes in mental health conditions like:

    depression
    schizophrenia
    anxiety disorders
    bipolar disorder

Social self-care involves activities that build and grow a person’s relationships. These include:

    engaging in healthy social media use
    spending time with family and friends
    keeping a date night on the calendar
    calling loved ones
    trying new hobbies and joining groups to meet and socialize with others

Learn more about the health benefits of being social.
Workplace self-care

Employees may find it essential to engage in activities that allow them to share their skills and strengths and make them feel fulfilled in their careers. This may also include striving for a work-life balance and doing tasks that prevent burnout.

A 2020 American Psychological Association (APA) survey found that three in five employees experience adverse impacts of work-related stress, like lack of interest, motivation, or energy and lack of effort at work.

Self-care examples related to work include:

    spending time with co-workers outside of work hours
    attending seminars and conferences
    taking a mental health break or vacation leave when necessary
    using time management
    not responding to work emails or messages outside of office hours

Learn more about how to deal with work anxiety.
Financial self-care

Self-care may also include managing one’s finances and actively meeting one’s financial goals and obligations.

A 2022 study found that financial literacy is a better predictor of happiness than income.

Examples of financial self-care activities include:

    completing tax responsibilities on time
    meeting with a financial advisor
    paying bills
    budgeting money
    learning about money management

Why is self-care important?

Looking after oneself is crucial to living a healthy and happy life. Amid increasingly busy lives, it can be easy to forget about looking after oneself. But engaging in self-care can help people feel better in different areas of their lives, including their health, relationships, and work.

Self-care behaviors are crucial for a healthy lifestyle and can lead to improved physical and psychological health. This, in turn, can boost individual and social well-being.

Similarly, a 2022 Iranian studyTrusted Source showed that self-rated health positively impacted Iranians’ happiness.

In a 2018 studyTrusted Source on U.S. medical students, findings showed that engaging in various self-care practices resulted in lower perceived stress and higher quality of life. They also have greater resiliency and a lower risk of higher levels of distress amid training.
Barriers to self-care 

While participating in self-care might seem easy on paper, in practice, barriers exist that may limit a person from engaging in regular self-care. Below are some of them:
Feeling selfish or guilty

Many people worry about being perceived as selfish if they practice self-care. People may feel compelled to use their time for others instead of self-care, particularly those in caring professions or with caring responsibilities.

A 2019 study found that self-care behaviors promote higher levels of professional quality of life among social workers.

Similarly, a 2017 study found that late-career psychologists who engage in more self-care tend to report greater professional well-being.
Lack of time

Self-care often takes the least priority in a person’s schedule. A person may have too many responsibilities and commitments or have difficulty prioritizing and managing their time.

In a 2019 study, three in four nursesTrusted Source in the U.S. reported not having enough time to exercise, prepare healthier meals, or do relaxing activities.

Learn more about ways to relax.
Lack of understanding

A person who does not understand their need for self-care and its benefits may not find it necessary to engage in it.

In a 2019 study, providing education intervention improved self-efficacy to overcome barriers and self-regulation in people with diabetes.
Belief that self-care is expensive

Some activities, like exploring a new hobby or traveling, tend to require money and may be challenging if finances are tight. Health conditions may also add a financial burdenTrusted Source which can also hinder self-care.

However, self-care does not have to be expensive. There are many budget-friendly ways to relax and take a break.
Lack of self-compassion

People who cannot extend understanding and acceptance to themselves when they feel inadequate or fail may not allow themselves to engage in self-care.

A study found a correlationTrusted Source between self-compassion and perceived self-care ability.
Poor support

A poor workplace culture that stigmatizesTrusted Source self-care, including seeking help or asking for vulnerability, may discourage people from engaging in self-care.
How to build a self-care action plan 

A person who wants to focus on their self-care may start by creating a self-care action plan. This will serve as a guide that will help them promote their own health and well-being. This involves the following steps:

    Assess one’s well-being and stress level: This includes understanding the importance of self-care and becoming self-aware of one’s needs. Many people are also unaware of how stressed they are and how it affects their lives. Assessing stress levels and well-being can give a person a picture of their current health.
    Identify stressors: Creating an inventory can help people identify their stressors or learn how to cope with them.
    Identify one’s coping strategies: Every person creates coping strategies to deal with life’s stressors. Making a list can help them recognize healthy and unhealthy coping strategies. They could then adopt healthier ones in exchange for unhealthy ones.
    Identify current self-care practices: A person can highlight the self-care practices they are already doing and see whether there are any imbalances.
    Identify potential barriers or obstacles: It is important to identify barriers or obstacles that can prevent a person from implementing their action plan. This way, a person can anticipate and address them when they come.

Learn more about why stress happens and how we can manage it.
Where to find support 

Engaging in self-care pursuits can be more achievable with support from other people.

A person may start by listing friends and family members who:

    they are comfortable with
    take their concerns seriously
    value them
    are trustworthy
    help them solve their problems

They can also look into community organizations for other people with similar interests or local support groups that deal with specific issues.

The Mental Health America Affiliate and National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI) Connection offer ways for a person to find support groups in their area.
Summary

Taking care of one’s self is essential for overall well-being. Self-care can help reduce stress, manage mental health conditions, and improve physical health.

Self-care activities can take many forms, such as taking a break, meditating, getting enough sleep and rest, reading a book, and learning to be kinder to oneself.

Creating a self-care action plan can be a significant step toward prioritizing self-care. With support and a proper action plan, one can implement self-care into their life and enjoy its benefits.


Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, serotonin-noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors, and benzodiazepines are the most common medications for anxiety and depression. The best option will depend on a person’s symptoms, overall health, and treatment aims.

According to the World Health Organization (WHO), approximately 5% of adultsTrusted Source globally experience depression. Anxiety disorders are the most common type of mental health condition in the United States, affecting 40 million adults yearly.

This article discusses medications a doctor may prescribe to treat anxiety and depression. It also explores other treatment options and diagnostic processes for these conditions.
What are anxiety and depression?
Marc Tran/Stocksy

Anxiety and depression are mental health conditions.

They often co-occur. Around 45% of people worldwide with lifetime major depressive disorder also experience one or more anxiety disorders.
Anxiety

Anxiety links closely with fear. This results in a future-oriented mood and behavioral response, where the person prepares for an anticipated event or situation that they perceive as threatening.

The fear can become worse over time and may interfere with daily life. Different types of anxiety disorders include generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, and phobias.
Depression

Depression is a mood disorder. It may result in symptoms such as:

    persistent sadness
    hopelessness
    irritability
    difficulty sleeping and concentrating
    thoughts of suicide

Like anxiety, depression may interfere with a person’s daily life.

Learn more about common signs and symptoms of depression.
Medications for anxiety and depression

Doctors may recommend medication in combination with other treatment options such as therapy for people experiencing anxiety and depression.

The most suitable treatment will depend on a person’s symptoms, co-occurring conditions, and the severity of their condition. Some medications can treat both conditions, while others are more suited to treating either anxiety or depression.

Antidepressant medications can help improve the symptoms of depression. With adequate treatment, 70 to 80%Trusted Source of people with depression may experience a significant reduction in their symptoms.

Medication for anxiety does notTrusted Source cure the condition but may help with symptomsTrusted Source such as panic attacks, extreme fear, and worry.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors

Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are a class of drugs that doctors consider first-lineTrusted Source treatments for depression and anxietyTrusted Source.

SSRIsTrusted Source work by increasing the level of serotonin in the brain. Serotonin is a molecule that has important bodily rolesTrusted Source, including regulating mood and behavior.

ResearchersTrusted Source believe that decreased serotonin in the brain may result in mental health conditions such as depression and anxiety. By increasing serotonin levels, SSRIs may help improve the symptoms of these conditions.

However, it may take up to 6 weeksTrusted Source before a person feels the beneficial effects of SSRIs.

Examples of SSRIs that doctors prescribe in the United States includeTrusted Source:

    fluoxetine (Prozac)
    sertraline (Zoloft)
    paroxetine (Paxil, Paxil CR, and Pexeva)
    fluvoxamine (Luvox)
    citalopram (Celexa)
    escitalopram (Lexapro)
    vilazodone (Viibryd)

Side effects

Side effects of SSRIs includeTrusted Source:

    anxiety
    restlessness
    insomnia
    dry mouth
    weight gain
    nausea
    diarrhea
    sweating
    headaches
    dizziness
    decreased sex drive
    anorgasmia, or difficulty orgasming

There is also an increased riskTrusted Source of suicidal ideation with SSRIs in young people up to age 25 years.

Some SSRIs, such as citalopram, can affect the heart, potentially leading to abnormal heart rhythms.
Dosage

A person takes SSRIs orally. They are available as tablets, capsules, liquid suspensions, and solutions.

The starting dose varies with each drug. For example, the starting doseTrusted Source for citalopram is 20 milligrams (mg) daily, while it is 5 to 10 mg per day for escitalopram.

A doctor may increase or decrease a person’s dose depending on the severity of their anxiety and how well they respond to treatment.
Stopping medication

A person may wish to discontinue SSRI treatment for various reasons, including side effects. A doctor will likely recommend that a person gradually lower their dosage over weeks or months.

A person may experience discontinuation symptoms when coming off SSRIs, including low mood and irritability.

Learn more about antidepressant withdrawal.
Serotonin-noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors

Serotonin-noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) are another class of drugs that doctors consider first-lineTrusted Source treatment for anxiety and depression.

SNRIsTrusted Source block the reuptake of serotonin and another chemical known as noradrenaline or norepinephrine. This increases the levels of these chemicals in the brain.

In this way, they can haveTrusted Source a beneficial effect on mood and emotion. SNRIs may take between 6 to 8 weeksTrusted Source to have a noticeable effect.

Examples of SNRIs includeTrusted Source:

    venlafaxine (Effexor)
    desvenlafaxine (Pristiq)
    duloxetine (Cymbalta)
    milnacipran (Savella)
    levomilnacipran (Fetzima)

Side effects

Common side effects of SNRIs includeTrusted Source:

    nausea
    insomnia
    dry mouth
    increased blood pressure
    sexual dysfunction
    weight gain
    headaches

There is also an association between this kind of medication and an increased riskTrusted Source of reduced bone mineral density and falls. In the elderly, this may result in fractures.
Dosage

The starting dose for SNRIs may also vary depending on the drug. For example, the starting doseTrusted Source for milnacipran is 12.5 mg per day, while the starting dose for venlafaxine is 37.5 to 75 mg per day.

Learn more about SSRIs and SNRIs.
Benzodiazepines

Benzodiazepines are a type of antianxiety medication that may helpTrusted Source reduce anxiety symptoms.

They work by enhancingTrusted Source the activity of gamma-aminobutyric acid, a chemical in the brain that has a repressive effectTrusted Source on nerves and movement.

According to research, the effects of benzodiazepines occur within 30 to 60 minutesTrusted Source. These fast-acting drugs may help with anxiety symptoms such as panic attacks, insomnia, and muscle tension.

Examples of benzodiazepines include:

    alprazolam (Xanax)
    clonazepam (Klonopin)
    diazepam (Valium)
    lorazepam (Ativan)

Side effects

The drawback of benzodiazepines is that a person may developTrusted Source tolerance to the medication. This means they require a higher dose to have the same effect. Because of this, a person may become dependent, and doctors usually prescribeTrusted Source benzodiazepines for short-term use only.

Learn more about drug dependence.

A person using benzodiazepines may experience some side effects, such as:

    drowsiness
    dizziness
    sedation
    loss of balance

Learn more about withdrawing from benzodiazepines.
Risks

Potential risks associated with long-term benzodiazepine use includeTrusted Source:

    dementia or dementia-like illnesses
    impaired motor function
    aggressive behavior
    impaired cognitive function
    addiction

Tricyclic antidepressants

Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs)Trusted Source are a class of medications doctors use to treat depression. Some may also prescribe them for anxiety.

TCAs work by blocking the reuptake of serotonin and noradrenaline, increasing their levels in the brain.

Examples of TCAs includeTrusted Source:

    amitriptyline
    imipramine (Tofranil)
    nortriptyline (Pamelor)

Side effects

Side effects of TCAs includeTrusted Source:

    dry mouth
    urinary retention
    constipation
    seizures
    low blood pressure

As they can causeTrusted Source significant adverse effects, doctors do not often prescribe TCAs for anxiety.

Learn more about TCAs.
Beta-blockers

A doctor may prescribe beta-blockers to help with symptoms of anxiety.

Beta-blockers are a class of drugs doctors usually useTrusted Source to treat heart conditions. They inhibit the actions of adrenaline and noradrenaline (norepinephrine), hormones that play a role in the body’s fight-or-flight response.

Beta-blockers may be able to improve physical symptoms of anxiety, includingTrusted Source:

    a fast heart rate
    a trembling voice
    dizziness
    sweating
    shaking hands
Common types of beta-blockers include:
    acebutolol (Sectral)
    atenolol (Tenormin)
    betaxolol (Kerlone)
    bisoprolol/hydrochlorothiazide (Ziac)
    bisoprolol (Zebeta)
    metoprolol (Lopressor, Toprol XL)
    nadolol (Corgard)
    propranolol (Inderal)
    sotalol (Betapace)
    carvedilol (Coreg)
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) are a type of antidepressant that blocksTrusted Source the function of monoamine oxidase.
Monoamine oxidase is an enzyme that breaks down chemicals such as serotonin, noradrenaline, and dopamine. When a person takes MAOIs, the levels of these chemicals in the brain increase, with a therapeutic effect.
MAOIs normally take 2 to 3 weeksTrusted Source to work. However, doctors do notTrusted Source consider them first-line due to their side effects and interactions with other drugs.
Examples of MAOIs includeTrusted Source:
    selegiline (Eldepryl and Zelapar)
    moclobemide (Manerix)
    isocarboxazid (Marplan)
    phenelzine (Nardil)
Side effects
Adverse effects of MAOIs may includeTrusted Source:
    dry mouth
    nausea
    diarrhea
    constipation
    drowsiness
    insomnia
    dizziness
Other treatment options
Medication may not suit everyone, and a person may prefer other treatment options for depression and anxiety. They may wish to consider:
    Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT): CBT focuses on identifying and modifying behaviors to better manage anxiety and depression. It may provide individuals with skills and tools to react more productively to certain situations.
    Exposure therapy: Exposure therapy involves a person moving toward anxiety-causing situations that they normally avoid to learn how to manage anxiety and reduce its symptoms.
    Arts and creative therapy: Creative therapy involves using music, painting, or drama to help a person express their feelings and manage symptoms.
    Talk therapy: Talk therapy involves a person speaking to a professional about experiences and feelings and may help them find new methods to manage situations.
    Support groups: Support groups provide a setting for individuals to meet others with anxiety or depression with whom they can discuss their feelings.
    Stress management techniques: Stress management techniques such as exercise, mindfulness, and meditation may help reduce anxiety and depression symptoms.
Diagnosis
A person will need to see a doctor to receive a diagnosis of anxiety, depression, or both.
A doctor will usually take a medical historyTrusted Source from the individual. Depending on the symptoms the person is experiencing, the doctor may also conduct a physical exam to rule out other conditions.
The doctor will likely ask about symptoms and the person’s mood and emotions. They may ask the person to complete a questionnaire identifying signs and symptoms of anxiety or depression.
For a person to receive a diagnosis of depression, their symptoms must be present for at least 2 weeksTrusted Source.
When to speak with a doctor
A person should speak with a doctor if they have been experiencing symptoms of depression or anxiety, such as low mood or anxious thoughts, for more than 2 weeks.
They may also want to see their doctor if they are on antidepressant or antianxiety medication and have been experiencing adverse effects.
Summary
Anxiety and depression are mental health conditions that affect mood and emotion. Anxiety is linked to fear and depression to low mood.
Some medications, such as SSRIs, SNRIs, and TCAs, treat both conditions. Others target one specific condition.
Nonmedicinal treatment options for anxiety and depression include CBT, exposure therapy, counseling, and support groups.
People should speak with their doctor if they are experiencing symptoms of depression and anxiety. A doctor can advise them on suitable treatment options.





